DAVY CROCKETT


There is no figure of speech that so exactly describes the westward
advance of the American population as that which compares it to the
feeding of a vast flock of wild pigeons. These, when they fall on a
forest rich with their chosen food, advance rapidly, rank after rank. As
those in the front pause for a moment to feed, others behind rise and
fly on beyond them, settling for a time to resume their own feeding
operations. Thus the progress of the hosts resembles a series of rolling
waves, one passing ever on beyond the other, each wave changing its own
relative position rapidly, yet ever going forward.

It was so with the American people. The Alleghanies could not stop them
in their west-bound march, nor the terrors of a relentless Indian
warfare, which endangered lives dearer to the rugged frontiersman than
his own. Nothing would do until the pathway of the waters had brought
the American settler to the Mississippi River, the great highway that,
whether by whim, chance, or design, had now become wholly the property
of the growing American government. Having arrived at the Mississippi
River, the population could not rest. Those behind pressed ever on.

Once across the Alleghanies the pathways had been pointed out by nature;
beyond the Mississippi these pathways were reversed. Man had not wings
like the wild bird. His pilgrimage must still be slow, his methods of
locomotion clumsy. The paths no longer lay even with the currents of the
streams. The adventurer into the West must, for the most part, follow
the reversed pathways of the waters. Briefly, the journey of the
frontiersman from Pennsylvania to the Mississippi was one of angles, the
first leg running to the southwest, thence northwest, thence southwest.
The pilgrimage profile from the Mississippi to the Rockies was equally
angular. The line of travel did not, for the most part, run directly to
the west. It angled out and upward, wherever water transportation led,
and where the streams showed the way.

In the story of Daniel Boone we have seen how he moved again and again,
seeking ever to edge a little farther to the west than his nearest
neighbors. Still another great frontiersman, Davy Crockett, beloved of
the American people, gives us instance of this patient progress of the
west-bound, halting, advancing, but never tiring. The life of Crockett
will afford in itself a good view of the profile of the population
movement, and will give as well a notion of the life and customs of
those early times.

Davy Crockett, backwoodsman and bear hunter, magistrate, legislator and
congressman; a man who at the time of his marriage scarcely knew one
letter of the alphabet from the other, yet at middle age was one of the
best-known figures of the American political world, and who was even
mentioned as a possibility for the presidency of the United States; a
man that lived like a savage and died like a hero—one of the uncouthest
gentlemen that ever breathed—such a man as this could have been the
product of none but an extraordinary day. We shall do well to note the
story of his life, for his is one of those colossal figures now rapidly
passing into the haze of forgetfulness or the mirage of mere conjecture.

In some fashion the names of Boone and Crockett are often loosely
connected. They were in part contemporaneous though not coincident.
Showing in common the rugged traits of the typical man of their time,
they were yet distinctly unlike in many qualities. A writer who knew
both men states that he considered Crockett the mental superior of
Boone. After weighing carefully all the evidence obtainable—and there
is much more information available concerning Crockett than in regard to
Boone—one would be disposed to differ from such an opinion.

Boone was the simpler and sincerer soul, the graver and more dignified
figure; Crockett the more magnetic personality, the more plausible, if
at times less candid, man. One man was practically as ignorant as the
other. Boone had no taste for political life, and his sole wish was to
live ever a little beyond that civilization of which he was the pioneer
and guide. Crockett, built also of good, common, human clay, for
two-thirds of his life seemed animated by no greater ambition.

Then all at once we see him turned politician. He succeeds, and his name
grows larger than his neighborhood and country. Not knowing the basis of
the tariff, ignorant of the text of the Constitution, master of the
practice, but unable to explain the theory, of a caucus or a town
meeting, he finds himself owner of a seat in the United States Congress,
fairly the central figure of that Congress, the cynosure not only of the
South but of the East and North.

He is at this time nothing but a great, good-humored boy, the very type
alike of an open-handed generosity, and an open-mouthed and sometimes
ill-timed levity. He is the product of political accident. Yet, wonder
of wonders, we find this man, quite past the time usually assigned as
the limit for the development and fixing of a man’s character, suddenly
blossoming out into a second development, a second manhood, more
thoughtful and more dignified than that of his early days. Without
education when he started for the halls of Congress, he gains that
education more rapidly than did ever man before.

Crockett returned to his home a graver and broader man. Even his speech
had gained freedom, ease and clarity, though still he delighted, perhaps
more in jest than otherwise, to bring in the crudities of expression,
the quips and quirks of that language through which he had, to his own
surprise and without his own plan, won his sudden notoriety—a notoriety
that was later to turn to fame.

There is not to be found in all the history of American statesmanship so
swift and sound a ripening into mature thought as that of this
backwoodsman, the first political “mugwump” or independent; who engaged
in politics for reasons of self-interest, and then all at once grew big
enough to set self-interest aside and to do what seemed to him wise and
right—a type of statesmanship now well-nigh defunct in America. And yet
we see him, in the pang of his first decisive political defeat, growing
bitter at his reverses, losing the genial philosophy of his earlier
years, even renouncing his country, and forthwith turning away from
family, friends and commonwealth to seek a new fortune in an alien land.

Some biographers of Crockett accord to him in this act the motives of
bold knight-errantry; yet impartial review of known facts leads one to
believe that Crockett’s abandonment of his family and his somewhat
erratic journey into Texas were most easily explicable by reasons of a
plausible self-interest. He was seeking political advancement along
lines of less resistance. Then, finding himself a member of a party of
souls as adventurous as himself, souls reckless and unrestrained,
ardent, eager, fearless, yet without a leader and without a definite
plan, Crockett the backwoodsman, Crockett the thinker, the orator, the
statesman, if you please, flings himself with the others into a needless
and fatal fight, rages with them in the most glorious struggle yet
chronicled in the pages of American history, fights like a Titan, dies
like a gallant gentleman, helps write the shining history of that
squalid hut in old San Antonio, and makes possible one of the most
burning sentences that ever adorned monument above hero’s grave:
“Thermopylæ had three messengers of defeat; the Alamo had not one!”

Here are contradictions that might be thought sufficient to give us
pause; yet not contradictions large or conclusive enough to rob Davy
Crockett of aught of the fame that has been accorded him by the American
people. In order to reconcile or explain these contrarieties, and hence
to understand this strange early American, we shall do well to review
the better known and most authentic incidents of his peculiar career.

Crockett does not go so far back in the history of the west-bound
American as does Daniel Boone. The latter died at the age of eighty-six.
Crockett, who died about ten years later than Boone, was but fifty years
of age. His life falls in the trans-Mississippi period of the Western
population movement. He was born August seventeenth, 1786, in Greene
County, Tennessee. His grandfather was an Irishman who came to
Pennsylvania, thence moved west in order to avail himself of the
settlers’ right of four hundred acres of land, which carried the
preemption right of an additional one thousand acres. A goodly portion
of a goodly earth lay ready to every man’s hand in that day of American
opportunity.

The second Crockett homestead, on the Holston River, was broken up by
the Indians, who killed the parents and several of the children, John
Crockett, David’s father, being one of the few that escaped. John
Crockett became a Revolutionary soldier, and after the Revolutionary War
moved to North Carolina, just as did the father of Daniel Boone.

Following the path of the earlier Argonaut, Boone, John Crockett in 1783
crossed the Alleghanies, but settled in eastern Tennessee, instead of
Kentucky. In this wilderness David was born. It was a land without
religion, without schools, without civilization. In such an environment
the weaker children died. Naked as a little Indian, David Crockett ran
about the rude cabin, and lived because he was fit to survive. One of
his earliest recollections is that of an incident in which his uncle,
Joseph Hawkins, figured. Hawkins accidentally shot one of the neighbors,
the ball passing through his body. There was no surgical skill possible,
and it was considered the proper thing in the treatment of this wound to
pass a silk handkerchief, carried on the end of a ramrod, from one end
to the other of the wound. Crockett appears to have seen his father pull
a silk handkerchief entirely through the body of this wounded neighbor.
It was a strong breed, that of Tennessee a hundred years ago!

Of course this settler must move west, and again west. At the fourth
move of his life he located on Cove Creek, the boy Davy being now about
eight years of age. About this time Crockett’s father lost his
grist-mill by fire. Naturally the remedy for this was to move, and he
again took up his journey, settling this time on the road between
Abingdon and Knowlton, where he opened a rude tavern, patronized mostly
by teamsters of the roughest sort,—certainly a hard enough environment
for the coming statesman.

The earliest description of Crockett represents him to be “a wiry little
fellow, athletic, with nerves of steel.” Even in childhood he was given
to fierce encounters, yet he was of an open and generous disposition. He
grew up practically without care, his father, if truth be told, being a
man of somewhat gross and drunken habits. Davy finally, at the mature
age of thirteen, forsook the paternal roof and set out in the world for
himself.

He chanced fortune with drovers, driving cattle to the eastward, and
learned to be hostler and general utility man, becoming acquainted with
the trail that ran between Abingdon, Witheville and Charlottesville,
Orange Court House and other points in Virginia. He worked for a few
months as a farm hand in Virginia. He wandered into Baltimore, with
wonder noticed the shipping there, and came near becoming a sailor, but
was rescued from that fate. Buffeted by fortune from pillar to post, he
worked one month for a farmer at a wage of five dollars. He went
apprentice to a hatter and worked for eighteen months for nothing, at
the end of which time the hatter unfortunately failed in business.

Poor Davy spent two years in these wanderings, and was fifteen years old
when all at once he again dawned upon the paternal grounds in eastern
Tennessee. These two years had been spent in considerable physical
discomfort and anguish of spirit, and the journey home was accomplished
only after many dangers and difficulties. Crockett admits that at this
time he did not know the letters of the alphabet. His father, shiftless
as ever, had been lavish with his promissory notes. He offered Davy his
“freedom” if he would work six months for a neighbor to whom he had
given a note for forty dollars. Davy generously did so, and capped it
off by working another six months and taking up another one of his
father’s notes, for thirty-six dollars. This last he was not obliged to
do, yet in spite of these bitter surroundings, there had flowered in the
young savage’s heart a certain feeling of family honor.

Now all at once the boy backwoodsman became conscious of his own
infirmities. He went to school six months, the only schooling he ever
had in his life. He learned to write his name, to spell to some extent,
to perform a few simple sums in arithmetic. Twice blighted in love at
eighteen years of age, he married a pretty little Irish girl, a daughter
of a neighboring family. “I know’d I would get her,” says he, “if no one
else did before next Thursday.”

Crockett was married in his moccasins, leggings and hunting shirt. His
bride was dressed in linsey-woolsey. There was no jewelry. The table on
which the wedding feast was spread was made of a single slab. The
platters were of wood, the spoons of pewter and of horn. In his own
abode, as he first entered it, there was no bed and not a chair, a knife
or a fork. Yet, after the expenditure of fifteen dollars, which he
borrowed, Crockett and his wife “fixed the place up pretty grand,” and
found it good enough for them for some years. Here two boys were born to
them.

At the ripe age of twenty years, that is to say in the year 1806,
Crockett considered it necessary for the betterment of his fortunes that
he should remove farther toward the West, this having been the universal
practice of his kind. He journeyed for four hundred miles through the
Western wilderness, taking his family and household goods with him.
Their transportation, as we are advised, consisted of one old horse and
two colts. These animals were packed with the household goods. In the
wild journey down the Holston the family, children and all, camped out,
enduring the weather as best they might. At last they came to a halt on
Mulberry Creek, in Lincoln County, in what they took to be the Promised
Land. The soil was generously rich, game and fish were abundant, the
climate was all that could be asked. Crockett built him a cabin, and
here he lived for two years, much as he had lived in eastern Tennessee.
Then, in the easy fashion of the time, he moved once more, this time
settling in Franklin County, on Bear Creek, still in the wilderness.

Here we find him living in 1813, at which time the call went out for
volunteers to serve in the Creek War under General Jackson. Without much
ado, Crockett said good-by to his family, joining those wild irregular
troops who, amid countless hardships, plodded up and down the region of
Alabama and Georgia, meeting the southern Indians, destroying them
wholesale or piecemeal as the case might be. Crockett marched,
counter-marched, acted as spy and hunter, doing his full share of the
work.

All the time he was rising in the esteem of his fellow men. He was now a
tall, large-boned, muscular man. His hair, we are told, was sandy, his
eyes blue, his nose straight, his mouth wide and merry; and so we see
Davy Crockett the grown man. Never having known anything but hardship
all his life, he has none the less never known anything but cheerfulness
and content. The apt jest and catching story are always ready on his
lips. He is the life of the camp-fire. Gradually he forges to the front.
The qualities of leadership begin to appear.

In all these rude military experiences, although Crockett does not fancy
the revolting scenes which in some instances he witnesses at the Indian
killings, he shows the ardent nature, the fighting soul. Hence he
respects the fighting man and pays his obedience to General Jackson.
There is no hint of that fatal falling out between the two men that
later is so suddenly to terminate Crockett’s ambitions.

In 1822, after his return from this petty war, Crockett’s fortunes once
more needed mending, and the remedy, of course, was to move again. He
had previously explored nearly all of Alabama, and later investigated
southern Tennessee, finally locating on Shoal Creek, in Giles County.
Crockett’s faithful wife, the little Irish woman, had died, and he, ever
ready to console himself, now married a widow of the neighborhood, an
estimable woman, who added two children to his already growing family.
This second wife appears to have been a dignified and able woman. Little
is known of her, and she seems to have lived the life of the average
frontier woman, patiently and uncomplainingly following her lord and
master in all his enterprises and his wanderings. Two pack-horses still
served to transport all the family goods on this latest journey.

The greed for land had rapidly sent a turbulent population into the
Cherokee country of the “New Purchase” where Crockett now resided, and
among these lawless souls restrictions were needed, although the country
knew no law and had no courts. Crockett was elected judge, without any
commission and without any formal process of law. He served wisely, and
although unable to write a warrant, he sometimes issued verbal warrants.
He claimed that his decisions were always just and that they “stuck like
wax.”

Meantime he had been elected colonel of militia over a bumptious rival.
Now, all at once, and perhaps originally more as a matter of jest than
anything else, as was the case in his second candidacy, his name came up
for the legislature. Crockett inaugurated a canvass on lines of his own.
In brief, he talked little of politics, for he knew nothing of such
matters. He told a brief story, traded a ’coon skin for a bottle of
liquor, treated the crowd, promised to sell a wolf scalp and treat them
again, and so passed on to the next gathering. He was elected without
difficulty.

But of course misfortune once more must overtake our hero, and he must
move again, this time as far as he can go and not cross the Mississippi
River. This next home, and the last one he established, was made in the
northwestern corner of Tennessee, on the Obion River, near the
Mississippi River, not far from what is now known as Reel Foot Lake, and
in the heart of that wild country then known as the “Shakes.”

This was near the submerged lands affected by the New Madrid
earthquakes, a country naturally rich in many ways. It was a cane-brake
country, a heavily timbered but somewhat broken region, crossed now and
again by terrific windfalls locally known as “hurricanes.” You may see
such country in the Mississippi Delta to-day, two hundred miles south of
Crockett’s home. Crockett’s neighbors on the Obion were three in number,
respectively seven, fifteen and twenty miles distant.

On his trip of exploration he planted his first crop of corn by means of
a sharp stick, just as he had broken the earth at each of his earlier
homes. He was rejoiced to find that the corn grew excellently, and yet
more rejoiced to know that he had found a superb hunting ground. In his
early life his game consisted chiefly of deer and turkey. Here bear,
deer and turkey were very numerous, and there were also elk occasionally
to be seen. The buffalo is never mentioned up to this time in Crockett’s
life, and that animal had probably by this time, 1822, become
practically extinct in Kentucky and Missouri.

Mr. J. S. C. Abbott, in his biography of Crockett, writes of his station
at this time: “Most men, most women, gazing upon a scene so wild, lonely
and cheerless, would say, ‘Let me sink into the grave rather than be
doomed to such a home as this.’” Such is the point of view of the narrow
observer that never knew his America. Not so Davy Crockett. He did not
find this region lonely or cheerless. On the contrary, we find him
fraternizing with the rude boatmen from points lower down on the
Mississippi River, and making himself very comfortable. Presently he
goes back after his family, bringing them on to his new home in October
of that year. They and their belongings are transported by two horses,
this limited cavalcade being still sufficient to carry all the worldly
belongings of David Crockett, hunter, warrior, magistrate and
legislator. Davy is still poor, but he does not wish to “sink into the
grave.” On the contrary, as he journeys along the wild woodland path he
sings, jests and whistles, happy as the birds about him, content among
the sweet mysteries of the untracked forests. He is the product of wild
nature, as savage as the most savage, a man primeval, unfettered, free.
He is the new man, the man of the west, the new-American.

As an example of Crockett’s early electioneering methods, we may cite
his procedure in his first canvass for the legislature. He says:

“I didn’t know what the government was. I didn’t know but General
Jackson was the government;” a statement not wholly the product of
sarcasm. He met Colonel Polk, later President Polk, and according to his
own story the colonel remarked:

“It is possible we may have some changes in the judiciary.”

“Very likely,” replied Davy, “very likely,” and discreetly withdrew.

“Well,” he comments, “if I know’d what he meant by ‘judiciary,’ I wish I
may be shot. I never heard there was such a thing in all nature.”

Yet another electioneering story attributed to Crockett, perhaps
authentic as many of those told regarding him, shows well enough the
rude temper of his region, if we do not go further, and accord to it a
certain hint of that native humor that was later to see its growth in
America.

“I had taken old Betsy,” says he, referring to his rifle, “and straggled
off to the banks of the Mississippi River, and meeting no game, I didn’t
like it. I felt mighty wolfish about the head and ears, and thought I’d
spile if I wasn’t kivvered in salt, for I hadn’t had a fight in ten
days. I cum acrost a fellow who was floatin’ down-stream, settin’ in the
stern of his boat, fast asleep. Said I, ‘Hello, stranger, if you don’t
take care your boat will get away from you;’ and he looked up and said
he, ‘I don’t value you.’ He looked up at me slantendicular, and I looked
down at him slantendicular; and he took a chaw of turbaccur, and said
he, ‘I don’t value you that much.’ Said I, ‘Come ashore. I can whip you.
I’ve been tryin’ to get a fight all the mornin’;’ and the varmint
flapped his wings like a chicken. I ris up, shook my mane, and neighed
like a horse.

“He run his boat plump head foremost ashore. I stood still and sot my
triggers—that is, I took off my shirt, and tied my gallusses tight
around my waist—and at it we went. He was a right smart ’coon, but
hardly a bait fer a feller like me. I put it to him mighty droll. In ten
minutes he yelled enough, and swore I was a ripstaver. Said I, ‘Ain’t I
the yaller flower of the forest? I’m all brimstone but the head and
ears, and that’s aquafortis.’ Said he, ‘You’re a beauty, and if I know’d
yore name I’d vote for you next election.’ Said I, ‘I’m that same Davy
Crockett. You know what I am made of. I’ve got the closest shootin’
rifle, the best ’coon dog, the biggest bear tickler and the ruffest
rackin’ horse in the district. I can kill more likker, cool out more
men, and fool more varmints than any man you can find in all Tennessee!’
Said he, ‘Good morning, stranger, I’m satisfied.’ Said I, ‘Good morning,
sir; I feel much better since our meeting—don’t forget about that
vote.’”

Congressmen to-day do not employ language quite so picturesque, or
methods of vote-getting quite so crude. The story is a trifle
apochryphal; yet Crockett himself, in what is called his autobiography,
a work which he no doubt dictated, or at least authorized, gives the
following account of one of his speeches to a stranger, at Raleigh,
while Crockett was en route to Washington to take his first seat in
Congress.

“Said he, ‘Hurrah for Adams!’ and said I, ‘Hurrah for hell, and praise
your own country!’ And he said, ‘Who are you?’ Said I, ‘I’m that same
Davy Crockett, fresh from the backwoods, half horse, half alligator, a
little touched with snapping turtle, can wade the Mississippi, leap the
Ohio, ride a streak of lightning, slide down a honey locust and not get
scratched. I can whip my weight in wildcats, hug a bear too close for
comfort, and eat any man opposed to Jackson.’” Which last remark he fain
would qualify largely later in his political career! An innate
shrewdness that told him how to avoid committing himself was Crockett’s
original capital in politics, as it was in life. His native wit, his
good fellowship, his rollicking good humor, his courage and strength,
his skill with weapons brought him success. He was fitted for success in
those surroundings.

Crockett is always chronicled as one of the great American hunters, and
this name he deserves. He was a good rifle-shot. In his cane-brake
country he hunted the black bear just as it is hunted to-day in the
similar country of the Mississippi Delta, by means of dogs, without
which the hunter would only by the remotest chance ever get sight of an
animal so shy as the black bear.

Abbott, who seems to apologize for Crockett, needs for himself an
apologist, for he displays a lamentable ignorance of the environment of
which he writes, as well as of many common facts in natural history. As
a matter of fact there was no risk whatever in the pursuit of the black
bear, even when the hunter was not accompanied by his dogs, whose
presence eliminated the last possible danger of the chase. In those days
the rifle was a single-shot muzzle-loader, in no wise so effective as
the modern hunting arm, but even thus early in the history of American
wild game, the black bear had ceased to be a formidable animal, if
indeed he ever was such.[14]

Abbott, with gross and indeed singular inaccuracy, repeatedly speaks of
Crockett as killing the “grizzly bear” and he mentions the “shaggy
skins” of these “ferocious animals.” In reality Davy Crockett saw
nothing but the flat, smooth hides of the common black bear of the
South, one of the most cowardly animals that ever lived. He killed
numbers of them, and enjoyed the vociferous chase with his hounds.
Sometimes he did not need to use the rifle, but killed the bear with the
knife, a feat often repeated by men of the present generation in the
cane-brake hunting of the South.

Crockett mentions killing one bear that weighed six hundred and
seventeen pounds, and he speaks of another that he thinks weighed six
hundred pounds. In one hunt of two weeks he killed fifteen bears. Once
he killed three bears in half an hour, and at another time six in one
day, with an additional four on the following day. In one week the total
was seventeen bears, and in the next hunt he speaks of killing ten of
the same animals. He states that he killed fifty-eight bears in the fall
and winter of that year, and in one month of the following spring he
added forty-seven bears to his score, a total of a hundred and five
killed in less than one year. In all he killed several hundred bears,
very many deer and countless small game. He was a benefactor to all the
poor laboring folk that lived anywhere near him, and speaks of giving
one poverty-stricken neighbor a thousand pounds of meat, the product of
his rifle during a few hours of one afternoon.[15]

There never was a land more fruitful in animal life than this South
which supported the early Westerners. In such surroundings life was a
simple matter. The chase and the rude field of corn offered sufficient
returns to satisfy the frontiersman.

One day as Crockett happened to be in a settlement, some forty miles
from his home, it was suggested that he run once more for the
legislature. He agreed, and forthwith announced himself as candidate.
His early methods were again successful. Discovering in himself now
certain latent powers whose existence he had not suspected, he later
agreed to run for Congress, but was defeated by his late supporter and
friend, Colonel Alexander, by the scant margin of two votes. Cotton was
high, and Alexander said it was because of the 1824 tariff. Davy did not
know what the tariff was, and could not answer!

Crockett at this time is described as a “finely proportioned man, about
six feet high, forty-five years of age, of very frank, pleasing and open
countenance.” He was dressed in homespun and wore a black fur cap on his
head, when seen by a traveler who met him at his house. He now began to
show “an unusual strength of mind and a memory almost miraculous.”
Uncultured, ignorant, terribly handicapped by lack of training and
opportunity, he overcame it all. He got his ammunition from the enemy.
He received his sole political education from his opponent’s political
speeches, as witness his second campaign for Congress. Cotton dropped in
price. Davy promptly found that the tariff argument would work both
ways, and he took his advantage. He was elected to Congress, and
re-elected, the second victory showing a majority of three thousand five
hundred votes.

It is at this stage of his career that we may speak of the birth of the
second or real David Crockett. These wild surroundings have now begotten
in him a rugged sense of self-reliance and a personal independence that
henceforth manifest themselves unmistakably. He is a politician, but an
independent politician. “I would as soon be a ’coon dog as to be obliged
to do what any man or set of men told me to do,” he says. “I will pledge
myself to support no administration.” “I would rather be politically
dead than hypocritically immortalized,” he declares; and in yet another
instance he says that he “will not submit to the party gee-whoa-haw;”
that he will be “no man’s man, and no party’s man.”

In spite of all these personal dicta he is elected. His election costs
one hundred and fifty dollars, all in borrowed money. It costs David
Crockett, congressman, an additional one hundred dollars, also borrowed,
to get to the national Capitol at Washington, where he arrives perhaps
the most unique specimen of Congressman ever produced in this broad land
of ours. His first act is to pay his debts—which not all Congressmen
since then have done so promptly. It is hard for the backwoods
congressman at Washington, yet he has good sense, good tact, good-nature
and a magnetic temperament. His motto, “Be sure you are right, then go
ahead,” wins for him sudden fame. Perhaps it is fame too sudden. Now we
must bid good-by to Davy Crockett, bear hunter. He is bitten of the
fatal poison of political ambition. From this time on the record of his
life is for a while public, plain and well known.

Crockett was a Southerner and, as has been stated, at first a friend of
the Jacksonian Democracy. Naturally he should have been expected to
prove loyal to the doctrines of the South, and the South at that time
was held in the hollow of Old Hickory’s hand. Note now a sudden
sternness of fiber in the bear hunter’s character that entitles him to a
better name than that of time-serving politician. As a matter of
conviction and principle he differs from the autocratic leader then
sitting in the president’s chair. He opposes President Jackson’s Indian
bill, and the proposition to withdraw the deposits from the United
States banks. Indeed, instead of being a follower of Jackson, he comes
out boldly as an opponent of his former leader.

The North hails him joyously as a Southerner with a Whig heart. Let Davy
make the most of it; none the less he loses the next contest for
Congress in his district. Yet he fights again, gets the nomination for
the next term, wins once more and hastens rapidly toward the height of a
national popularity. Realizing his own ignorance of the North and East,
in 1834 he undertakes a journey to those sections. At Baltimore he sees
a railroad for the first time in his life, and witnesses the tremendous
feat of seventeen miles made by a railway train in the time of
fifty-five minutes! At Philadelphia crowds meet him at the wharf and
cheer him to the echo. He is banqueted repeatedly, wined and dined times
without number, and made the recipient of countless attentions. The
young Whigs of Philadelphia come close to his heart when they make him a
present of a fine rifle, the very rifle that took the place of “Old
Betsy” and was with Crockett in his last fight at the Alamo.

In New York, in Boston and the larger manufacturing towns of
Massachusetts, Crockett repeats his Philadelphia triumphs. He is now a
national figure. His sayings and doings are quoted throughout the land.
If his Northern speeches are correctly reported, he has at this time
suddenly become the possessor of an easy and not undignified oratorical
style, though all his speeches are still well sprinkled with quaint
epigrams and homely illustrations.

We see in the Crockett of 1834 a figure not approached by any other
American statesman so nearly as by that other rugged Westerner, Abraham
Lincoln. These crude, virile, tremendous, human men, product of the
soil, born of the hard ground and the blue sky—how they do appeal, how
they do grow, how they do succeed.

Crockett is asked to visit Harvard College, but refuses for quaint
reasons of his own. Andrew Jackson has been made an LL. D. by Harvard,
and Crockett says that “one LL. D. is enough for Tennessee.” He is the
guest of Lieutenant-governor Armstrong, and chronicles naïve surprise
that Mr. Armstrong “did not charge him anything,” for entertaining him.
He states that in New England he found “more liberality than the Yankee
generally gets credit for.” He expresses his gratitude for the kindly
reception accorded him in New England and chronicles his admiration for
the thrift and industry of that country, which seems to have made a
vivid impression on his mind, different as these scenes were from the
wild surroundings in which he himself had grown up.

This trip into the North wrought epochal change for our bear hunter. He
learns now about the tariff, studies and approves the doctrines of
protection—rank heresy for a Southerner. Deep water for Davy now! He
seems to have had no counsel of prudence, for now he loses no
opportunity to chronicle his animosity toward General Jackson.

“Hero—that is a name that ought to be first in war and last in peace,”
says he. Commenting on the faithlessness of the government, he flames
out: “I had considered a treaty as the sovereign law of the land, and
now I hear it considered as a matter of expedience.” This was in
reference to the treatment accorded the southern Indians by the United
States government.

“This thing of man-worship I am a stranger to,” says he, with personal
allusion, of course, to Jackson. In all these sayings he is, it may
naturally be supposed, heartily applauded by the Northerners, who
rejoice in this notable accession to their own ranks.

Davy Crockett, bear hunter and congressman, has now had his chance. He
takes himself seriously, even when he jokes about his being the next
president of the United States. Crockett represents now the success of
perfect digestion, of the perfectly normal nervous system. Nothing
irritates him. The world to him runs smoothly, as it does to any hardy
animal. He cares not for the past and has no concern for the physical
future. His big brain, so long fallow, so long unstirred, begins now to
fill up with thoughts and ideas and comparisons and conclusions. His
reason is clear and bright. He presents to the world the startling
spectacle of a middle-aged man educating himself to the point of an
intelligent statesmanship, and that within the space of a few brief
months or years. He displays a clarity of vision nothing short of
marvelous. His memory of names, of dates and data is something
startling. The world of books remains closed to him, so that he learns
by ear, like a child, but he surprises friends and foes alike. The husk
of the chrysalis has been broken. The Westerner has been born into the
American!

Davy Crockett had thus far never met any danger of a nature to inspire
fear, any difficulty he could not overcome, any hardship he could not
lightly endure. He now encountered one enemy greater than any to be met
with in the wilderness—that great and menacing foe, the political
machine. He found to his sorrow that honor and manhood will not always
serve, and at the summit of his success he met his first and
irremediable defeat.

Crockett, once the politician, now grown into Crockett the eager
student, the earnest statesman, had stirred up animosities too great for
him to overcome. The relentless hand of Jackson smote hard upon
Crockett’s district. There was talk of money, and of votes influenced by
its use. Poor Davy, who went into this last campaign of Congress as
blithely and as sure of success as ever in his life, learned that he had
been defeated by a total of two hundred and thirty votes! Then there
arose from the honest and generous soul of this strange child of the
wilderness a great and bitter cry. He was among the first to exclaim
against the creed of politics pursued as politics, of statesmanship that
is not statesmanship—the creed of party and not of manhood.

“As my country no longer requires my services,” he writes, “I have made
up my mind to leave it.” Expressing his determination forthwith to leave
Tennessee and to start for the distant land of Texas, he says, “I have a
new row to hoe, a long and rough one; but I will go ahead.” He adds as
quaintly as ever, “I told my constituents they might all go to hell, and
I would go to Texas.”

We come now to the third and closing stage of the life of David
Crockett, and in order to understand it we must bear in mind the nature
of the opinions then current concerning the new land that to the
Southerners of that time was “The Great West,” the land beyond the
Mississippi. Texas, a magnificent realm eight hundred and twenty-five by
seven hundred and forty-five miles in extent, already had an American
population of nearly forty thousand; and of all wild populations ever
gathered together at any place or time of the world, this was perhaps
the wildest and the most indomitable. There was hardly a soul within the
borders of that great land who was not a fighting man and who had not
come to take his fighting chance. It was fate that Davy Crockett should
drift into this far Southwest and take his chances also.

As to the chances of it, they were not so bad. It was almost sure that
Texas would ultimately be won from Mexico. In 1813 an expedition of
Americans had fought Spain and killed some hundreds of Spaniards, on the
strength of the general claim that the territory of Louisiana extended
westward as far as the Rio Grande, and not merely to the neighborhood of
the Sabine River, as was claimed by Spain. The latter river was in 1819
generally accepted as the boundary line, but this fact did not serve to
stop the Americans.

In 1823 Stephen A. Austin was settling his Mexican grant with his new
colony. These families drew after them the inevitable train of relatives
and friends, so that the great River Road to the South and Southwest
soon began to be pressed by the feet of many pilgrims. In 1821 Lafitte
made his rough settlement at Galveston, and the pirates of Lafitte were
no worse than the average Texas population of that time. There were no
schools, no courts, no law. One writer states that he sat at breakfast
with eleven men, each of whom had pending against him in another state a
charge of murder. Then originated the etiquette of the wild West that
demanded that no one should inquire into his neighbor’s past, nor ask
his earlier name.

In 1833 there were twenty thousand Americans that wished Texas to have
an organization separate from the state of Coahuila. They were not so
particular as to what government claimed their state, but they wished to
organize and run it for themselves. Meeting a natural opposition from
Mexico in this enterprise, in the year 1835 they banded their forces,
overturned the Mexican government, and set up a provisional government
of their own. Henry Smith was chosen provisional governor and Sam
Houston commander-in-chief of this wildest of all American republics.

On December twentieth, 1835, these Texans issued their proclamation of
independence, some sixty years after the Declaration of the American
Independence. This meant but one thing. Santa Anna, then as much as
anybody governor of affairs in Mexico, marched with an army, stated to
have numbered seven thousand five hundred men, to besiege the Texans,
whose main body was located at San Antonio. No American doubted the
ultimate issue. All the South knew that the wild and hardy population of
this new region would beat back the weak Latin tenants of the soil. The
matter was well discussed and well understood. It was not
knight-errantry, therefore, so much as politics, that led Davy Crockett
southward into this wild hornets’ nest. Rather should we say that all
this movement was part of the mighty, inexplicable, fateful,
irresistible Anglo-Saxon pilgrimage across this continent. It was a New
World. These new men were those fitted to occupy and hold it.

At this time the historian of Crockett falls on a curious difficulty.
There is published what purports to be an autobiography of David
Crockett’s life, a linsey-woolsey affair, made up partly of good English
and partly of rough backwoods idiom such as we are accustomed to
associate with the speech of this singular man. This “autobiography”
purports to be continued after Crockett leaves his Tennessee home for
far-off Texas. Yet at this point its style and subject matter assume
such shape as to lead one inevitably to conclude that Crockett did not
write it. There are many contradictions and discrepancies, and much of
the detailed story of Crockett’s wanderings in the Southwest is denied
by practically the only eye-witness of the time qualified to tell of his
experiences—that Jonathan H. Greene (the “Harrington” of Crockett’s
correspondence), once gambler and later reformed man, who was with
Crockett for a time before the Alamo fight. Greene’s story does not in
all points tally with the so-called autobiography of Crockett, nor with
many of the popular histories of his life.

In general it may be determined that, with some feeling but without much
ado, Crockett said farewell to his wife and family. He had no longer
heart for bear hunting. He wished a wider field of life. His journey was
down the Mississippi and up the Arkansas River to Little Rock. There he
encountered many hail-fellows-well-met, and had several experiences,
which are set forth at length in his autobiography. He journeyed then
horseback to Fulton, descended the Red River to Natchitoches and thence
made his way westward across Texas.

The so-called autobiography of Crockett describes two or three strange
characters: the “Bee Hunter,” who might have been the hero of an English
melodrama of the time; “Thimblerig,” the sharper whom Crockett reforms
and leads on to die a hero’s death; the “Pirate,” who dies in front of
the Alamo gate; and so on. There is something strangely unreal in much
of this. It does not ring true. Yet we are further told that Crockett
crossed the Sabine, that he met the Comanches, that he saw for the first
time the tremendous herds of buffalo, that he encountered bands of wild
horses, that he saw much wild game, and in a knife fight killed a
panther. The feeling is irresistible that many of these pictures are
made to order.

At last, however, without much ado and without any adequate explanation
of Crockett’s real motives, we find him inside the gates of the San
Antonio barracks, one of that little party whose heroic death was to set
the whole American nation a-throb, first with vengeful fire, and then
with a passionate love and admiration.

The situation was thus: Travis in San Antonio, practically hemmed in at
the adobe building known as the Alamo; Fannin at Goliad, with other
noble fellows later to fall victims to Mexican treachery; at a distance
Sam Houston, apparently irresolute and non-committal. Austin, Fannin,
Travis, Rush, James Bowie, the Whartons, Archer of Virginia—what a list
of strong names was here, these fighting men, some of whom had come for
politics, some for sport, some for sheer love of danger and adventure.
Of these, Bowie, Crockett, Fannin and Travis might have been declared
opposed to the party of Houston and Austin. Crockett’s authentic letter
bitterly accuses Houston, the leader of the Texans. Houston, mysterious,
vain, enigmatical, as able as he was erratic, might perhaps, had his
followers been less tempestuous and independent, have united them into a
harmonious and powerful whole. He could not, or did not. Hence came the
Alamo fight.

Of this wild army, half ruffian, half adventurous, most of the men were
poor, although they came in many cases from good families. They had
behind them an undeniable sentiment in favor of the independence of
Texas, and were backed by money raised for that purpose. General Jackson
openly and notoriously favored the annexation of Texas, and perhaps even
of Mexico, and went so far as to suggest a few practical though
unauthorized plans of his own as to how the army might be used to bring
about a conflict and later a pax Jacksonii. Thus we find our hero, Davy
Crockett, once more falling into the plans of his former chief, his
recently victorious antagonist, Old Hickory.

It is possible that Crockett was deceived in his pilgrimage to Texas.
There is more than a suspicion that he was used as a cat’s paw in a
political movement. He says that “Houston is enjoying the support of the
Government, while others are left to do the fighting.” He continues,
“Houston has dealt with us in prevarications.” He calls Houston the
“agent” and Jackson the “manufacturer.” Yet certainly Crockett was
backed by a prevalent and strongly growing sentiment. The records are
too vague and insufficient. We shall never fully understand all these
complications of early and adventurous politics.

Be all these things as they may, Crockett was one of the devoted little
band of a hundred and eighty-three Texans, who in time found themselves
besieged by an army of Mexicans from five thousand to eight thousand
strong. The peons of Santa Anna’s worthless army came on day after day,
the bands playing the Dequelo, which meant “no quarter.” For eleven days
the Texans held the Alamo, in that historic fight whose details are so
generally and so uncertainly known. These one hundred and eighty-three
men killed of the enemy more than one thousand. Worn out by loss of
sleep and continuous muscular exertion, their arms simply grew weary
from much slaying. Their hands could no longer push down the ladders
weighted with the struggling peons goaded forward by the swords of their
officers.

At length an assault was lodged. The swart Mexicans, more in terror than
in exultation, poured across the broken wall. In the hospital lay forty
helpless men, each with his rifle at his side. These, sick and crippled,
broken-bodied, iron-hearted, poured their last volley into their
assailants as they came in. A cannon was discharged down the room and
nearly a score of the crippled and sick were blown to pieces. Outside,
in the open space, the lances of the Mexicans reached farther than the
clubbed rifles or the bitter, biting knives of the stalwart Americans,
now raging in their last tremendous, magnificent and awful Baresark
rage.

No one knows the story of the end. Even the number of the victims is
matter of dispute to-day. Some say there were a hundred and eighty-three
defenders, some say a hundred and eighty-six. Some say one woman
escaped; some say two. Some declare that one negro servant got away;
some say two. The state of Texas adopted the “Alamo baby,” but the Alamo
baby did not see Crockett fall. There are different reports. Some state
that there were six Americans left hemmed up against the wall, and that
the Mexican general, Castrillon, called upon them to surrender. They did
so, Crockett being one of the six. Confronting the Mexican commander,
they were treacherously ordered to be shot down. It is said that
Crockett, bowie knife in hand, sprang with all his force for the throat
of the Mexican general, but was cut down or shot down with the others,
“his face even in death wreathed in an expression of contempt and scorn
at such treachery.”

All this is but imagination; and there is all reason to suppose that
there never was any surrender of these six last survivors. The commoner
story is that Crockett fought to the last with his broken rifle, and was
killed against the wall, before him lying the bodies of some twenty
Mexicans. The usual impression is that he killed these twenty Mexicans
himself before he was cut down, but this is perhaps the result of
emotional writing. No one knows how many foes had fallen to his arm. No
one can tell how many Mexicans each of these raging, fighting men
destroyed before he himself went down. Earlier in the siege Crockett
recounts picking off five cannoneers one after the other. He tells how
the Bee Hunter and Thimblerig did their sharpshooting, how the Pirate
died of wounds received in a sortie, how the Bee Hunter—a most unlikely
thing—burst into poesy and song at the hoisting of the Texas flag. Some
of these things have too unreal a sound. There is something not quite
Crockett, though à la Crockett, in the conclusion of Crockett’s
so-called, or rather alleged, diary:

“March 5.—Pop, pop, pop! Bom, bom, bom! throughout the day. No time for
memorandums now. Go ahead. Liberty and independence forever!”

These are the last recorded words of dear Davy Crockett. It is probable
in the extreme that he never wrote them. It is unlikely to an equal
degree that, in all the turmoil of the Alamo fight, he could
deliberately have kept a diary, or that it could have been preserved
after all the horrible details of that bloody and disastrous conflict.
As to the end of Davy Crockett, there is and has been no living human
being who could speak with absolute accuracy and authenticity. Bloody
San Jacinto, the field where the cry “Remember the Alamo!” was the
watchword of a dire and just revenge, left but few Mexican eye-witnesses
of the Alamo.

Be that as it may, we know that Davy Crockett died fighting, that he
died with his face to the enemy, like the brave man that he was,
undaunted, unafraid. No politics now, no statesmanship, no little
ambitions now for Davy Crockett. He was once more the child of the
wilderness, stark, savage, exultant, dreadful, one more of those Titanic
characters that swept away a weaker population, beat down all
opposition, conquered the American wilderness and made way for an
American civilization.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The study of Crockett’s life shows us an America yet loose and
scattered, not knit together into a national whole; and the political
problems of that day were still those arising from geography. Backwoods
Davy was after all not so poor a thinker, nor so far from getting to the
marrow of things. After his visit to the North, and his reconciliation
to the doctrines of a protective tariff, he makes one comment which,
while it may not settle political argument, ought to teach a national
courtesy and a human tolerance on both sides in any national difference.

“If Southerners would visit the North,” he says, “it would give
different ideas to them who have been deluded and spoken in strong terms
of dissolving the Union.” A trifle ungrammatical this, perhaps, but
startling reading, when one remembers that it was recorded in 1834.
Again we find our independent thinker discussing freely the questions of
transportation, which were then and always have been so important in
this country. He was opposed to Jackson in the first place because
Jackson “vetoed the bill for the Maysville road.” He was opposed to Van
Buren because he “voted against the continuance of the national road
through Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, and against appropriations for its
preservation.” He opposed Van Buren further because he “voted in favor
of toll gates on the national road, demanding a tribute from the West
for the right to pass on her own highways, constructed out of her own
money,—a thing never heard of before.”

Crockett’s changes of residence, ever drifting farther to the westward
in his native state, and his final long pilgrimage to the Southwest,
where he certainly, though his autobiography does not so state, visited
different parts of Texas and the Indian nations, is index of the
tendency of the times. The West of that day is the South of to-day.
Thus, a writer of 1834 states, “The West is settled by representatives
from every country, but it is very largely indebted for its inhabitants
to Virginia, Georgia and the two Carolinas.” History and our census maps
show us that the day of the upper West was yet to come. Boone and his
like had led across the Appalachians. Crockett and his like had crossed
the Mississippi. The march toward the Rockies was now steadily and
determinedly begun, under what difficulties and with what results we
shall presently observe.

-----

Footnote 14:

  The black bears which fed on the corpses left on the field of
  Braddock’s Defeat became for a time bold and somewhat fearless of man.

Footnote 15:

  These stories are not to be doubted, and are not especially wonderful.
  The writer has often hunted in Mississippi with a planter, Colonel R.
  E. Bobo, who more than equalled all of Crockett’s records. In one
  year, soon after his first arrival in Coahoma County, Mississippi,
  Colonel Bobo killed two hundred and six bears. The writer was present
  when ten bears were killed in eight days.

