DOLL-IN-THE-GRASS


Once upon a time there was a King who had twelve sons. When they were
grown big he told them they must go out into the world to win
themselves wives, but these wives must each be able to spin and weave
and sew a shirt in one day, else he would not have them for
daughters-in-law.

To each he gave a horse and a new suit of clothes, and they went out
into the world to look for their brides. When they had gone a little
way together they said they would not have Boots, their youngest
brother, with them, for he was stupid.

So Boots had to stay behind, and he did not know what to do or where to
turn. He became very downcast, and got off his horse and sat down in
the tall grass to weep. But when he had sat a while, one of the tufts
in the grass began to stir and move, and out of it came a little white
thing. When it came nearer, Boots saw it was a charming little lassie,
“such a tiny bit of a thing.” The lassie went up to him and asked if he
would come down below and see “Doll-in-the-Grass.”

“Yes, I’d be very happy,” he said, and went.

When he got down, there sat Doll-in-the-Grass on a chair. She was the
tiniest little lassie you can imagine, and very, very lovely. She asked
Boots where he was going, and what was his business. So he told her how
there were twelve brothers of them, and how the King had told them each
one must go out into the world and find himself a wife who could spin
and weave and sew a shirt in one day.

“But if you will only say at once that you will be my wife,” said Boots
to Doll-in-the-Grass, “I’ll not go a step farther.”

She was willing, and so she made haste and spun and wove and sewed the
shirt, but it was very, very tiny. It wasn’t more than two inches long.

Boots went off home with it, but when he brought it out he was almost
ashamed of it, it was so small. But the King was pleased with it, and
said he should have her. So Boots set off, glad and happy, to fetch his
little sweetheart.

When he came to Doll-in-the-Grass he wished to take her up before him
on his horse. But she would not have that, for she said she would sit
and drive along in a silver spoon, and that she had two small white
horses to draw her. So off they set, he on his horse and she in her
silver spoon, and the two horses that drew her were two tiny white
mice; but Boots always kept the other side of the road, for he was
afraid lest he should ride over her, she was so little.

When they had gone a little way they came to a great piece of water.
Here Boots’s horse got frightened, and shied across the road and upset
the spoon, and Doll-in-the-Grass tumbled into the water. Then Boots was
in great distress, for he did not know how to get her out again; but in
a little while up came a merman with her, and now she was as tall and
well grown as other men and women, and far lovelier than she had been
before. So he took her up before him on his horse, and rode home.

All Boots’s brothers had come back with their sweethearts, but none had
woven so dainty a little shirt as Doll-in-the-Grass, and none were half
so lovely. When the brothers saw her they were as jealous as jealous
could be of their brother; but the King was so delighted with her that
he gave them a fine wedding feast, and had them live with him in his
palace, and he gave out word that they should follow him on the throne.