DIAMONDS AND TOADS


Once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters. The elder was
so much like her, both in looks and in character, that whoever saw the
daughter saw the mother. They were both so disagreeable and so proud
that there was no living with them. The younger, who was the image of
her father in courtesy and sweetness of temper, was one of the most
beautiful girls ever seen. As people naturally love those who are like
them, this mother doted upon her elder daughter, and at the same time
conceived a great aversion to the younger. She made her eat in the
kitchen and work continually.

Among other things, the poor child had to go twice a day to draw water
more than a mile and a half from the house, and bring home a large
pitcherful of it. One day when she was at the fountain a poor woman
came to her and asked her to let her drink.

“Oh, yes! with all my heart, Goody,” said the pretty little girl.
Rinsing the pitcher at once, she filled it at the clearest part of the
fountain and gave it to her, holding up the pitcher all the while, that
she might drink the more easily.

Then the good woman said to her, “You are so pretty, so good, and so
courteous, that I cannot help giving you a gift.”

For this was a fairy, who had taken the form of a poor countrywoman to
see how far the civility and good manners of this young girl would go.

“I will give you for a gift,” continued the fairy, “that at every word
you speak there shall come out of your mouth either a flower or a
jewel.”

When this pretty girl got home, her mother scolded her for staying so
long at the fountain.

“I ask your pardon, mamma,” said the poor girl, “for not making more
haste”; and as she spoke these words there fell from her lips three
roses, three pearls, and four diamonds.

“What do I see here?” said the mother, quite astonished. “I think I see
pearls and diamonds come out of the girl’s mouth. How happens this, my
child?”

This was the first time she had ever called her “my child.”

The girl told her frankly all that had happened to her, dropping from
her mouth great numbers of diamonds as she spoke.

“Really,” cried the mother, “I must send my own dear daughter thither.
Fanny! Fanny! look! see what comes out of your sister’s mouth when she
speaks! Would you not like, my dear, to have the same gift? You have
only to go and draw water at the fountain, and when a poor woman asks
you to let her drink, to give it to her very civilly.”

“I should like to see myself going to the fountain to draw water,” said
this ill-bred minx.

“I insist that you go,” said the mother, “and that at once.”

So away she went, taking with her the best silver tankard in the house,
but grumbling all the way.

She no sooner reached the fountain than she saw coming out of the wood
a lady, magnificently dressed, who came up to her and asked for a
drink.

This was the same fairy who had appeared to her sister, but she had now
taken the air and the dress of a princess, to see how far this girl’s
rudeness would go.

“Am I come here,” said the ill-bred, saucy girl, “to serve you with
water, pray? I suppose this silver tankard was brought wholly on
purpose for your ladyship, was it? I should think so! You must drink
out of the fountain, if you want any.”

“You are hardly polite,” answered the fairy, without putting herself in
a passion. “Well, then, since you are so disobliging, I give you for a
gift, that at every word you speak there shall come out of your mouth a
snake or a toad.”

As soon as her mother saw her coming, she cried out, “Well, daughter?”

“Well, mother,” answered the rude girl, throwing out of her mouth a
viper and a toad.

“Oh, mercy!” cried the mother, “what is this I see? It is her sister
who is the cause of all this, but she shall pay for it”; and
immediately she ran to beat her.

The poor child fled away from her and went to hide herself in the
forest near by. The King’s son, as he was returning from hunting, met
her, and seeing how beautiful she was, asked her what she was doing
there all alone, and why she was crying.

“Alas, sir, my mother has turned me out of doors!”

The King’s son, seeing five or six pearls and as many diamonds fall
from her mouth, desired her to tell him how that happened. Then she
told him the whole story.

The King’s son fell in love with her, and, considering that such a gift
was worth more than any marriage portion any one else could bring,
conducted her to the palace of the King, his father, and there married
her.

As for her sister, she made herself so much hated that her own mother
turned her out of doors. The miserable girl, after wandering about
without finding any one who would take her in, went away to a corner of
the wood and there died.