FAIR GOLDILOCKS


There was once a King’s daughter who was so beautiful that nothing in
the world could be compared with her. And because she was so beautiful,
and because her hair was finer than spun gold and fell in waves to her
feet, she was called Princess Goldilocks. She always wore a crown of
flowers; her dresses were embroidered with diamonds and pearls; and
every one who saw her loved her.

In a neighboring country there lived a young King who was not married,
and who was very handsome and very rich. When he heard all that was
said about fair Goldilocks, before he had ever seen her, he fell so
deeply in love with her that he could neither eat nor drink for
thinking of her. He determined to send an ambassador to ask for her
hand in marriage. He had a splendid coach made for his ambassador, and
giving him more than a hundred horses and a hundred servants, he
charged him well to bring the Princess back with him.

After the ambassador had departed nothing else was talked of at the
court but his mission. The King felt so sure of Goldilocks’s consent
that he set his people to making beautiful dresses for her, and
splendid furniture for her suite of rooms. Meanwhile the ambassador
reached her court and delivered his message. But either the Princess
did not happen to be in a good humor that day, or the offer did not
suit her fancy, for she told the ambassador that she thanked the King,
but she had no desire to marry. The ambassador left the Princess’s
court feeling very much cast down at his failure. He was bringing back
all the gifts that the King had sent her, for the Princess was too well
brought up to accept the pearls and diamonds when she was refusing the
King; but, in order not to give offense, she kept a little package of
English pins.

When the ambassador reached the King’s capital, where the King was
waiting impatiently, every one was in great distress because he had not
brought fair Goldilocks back with him. The King wept like a child, and
no one could console him.

Now there was at the court a young man who was handsomer and more
gifted than any one else in the kingdom. Because of his grace and his
ready wit he was called Charming. Every one liked him except a few
people who were jealous of him because the King showed him favor and
made him his confidant. One day Charming was with some people who were
talking about the ambassador’s return and were saying that his visit
did not seem to have done much good. Without thinking very much what he
was saying, Charming remarked, “If the King had sent me to Princess
Goldilocks I am sure she would have come back with me.”

Then these telltales ran straight to the King and said: “Your Majesty,
what do you think Charming has been saying? That if he had been sent to
Princess Goldilocks he would have brought her back with him. Did you
ever hear of such impudence? He thinks he is handsomer than you, and
that she would have fallen so deeply in love with him that she would
have followed him anywhere.”

The King was beside himself with anger.

“Ha, ha!” said he; “so this spoiled youngster laughs at my misfortune,
does he, and thinks himself better than his King? Go and put him in my
great tower, and let him die of hunger.”

The King’s guards went to fetch Charming, who had quite forgotten his
idle speech, and dragged him off to prison with all kinds of violence.
The poor boy had only a little straw for his bed, and he would have
died had it not been for a little stream which flowed through the
tower, at which he could get water to cool his parched tongue. One day
when he was in despair he cried aloud: “What can I have done to offend
the King? He has not a more faithful subject than I. I have never done
a thing to harm him.”

The King happened to be passing near the tower and heard the voice of
his former favorite. He stopped to listen, in spite of the efforts of
Charming’s enemies, who tried to persuade him to have nothing to do
with the traitor. But the King said: “Let me alone. I want to hear what
he is saying.”

At the sound of Charming’s laments, tears filled the King’s eyes, and
he opened the tower door and called to him. Charming came forward in a
pitiable state, and, throwing himself at the King’s feet, said, “What
have I done, sire, to deserve this cruel treatment?”

“You mocked me and my ambassador,” said the King. “You said that if you
had been sent for Princess Goldilocks you would have brought her back.”

“It is true, your Majesty,” replied Charming. “I should have told her
so much about you and your good qualities that she would not have been
able to refuse you. But I cannot see what there is in that to displease
you.”

When the King considered it from this point of view he could not see
anything in it to make him angry, and began to frown fiercely on those
who had made him believe ill of his favorite. He took the boy away with
him, repenting deeply the wrong he had done him. When he had seen to it
that Charming had a good supper, he called him to his private room and
said: “Charming, I am as much in love as ever with fair Goldilocks; her
refusal has made no difference in my feelings. But I do not know how to
gain her consent. I should like to send you to see if you could
succeed.”

Charming replied that he was ready to fulfill his King’s least wish,
and would set out the next morning.

“But wait,” said the King; “I want to provide you with a fine escort.”

“There is no need of that,” answered Charming. “I want only a good
horse, and letters from you.”

The King was delighted at his willingness to start so soon, and
provided him with what he needed. It was on a Monday morning that he
started out alone, thinking always, as he went, how he should persuade
Princess Goldilocks to marry the King. In his pocket he carried a
writing tablet, and whenever a happy thought occurred to him he
dismounted from his horse and sat down under the trees to write it, so
that he might be sure not to forget anything which might be of use in
his speech to the Princess.

One morning, when he had started early, as he was crossing a great
meadow he had a capital idea. So he sprang from his horse and sat down
under a willow tree by a little stream. When he had written it down he
began to look about him and admire the pretty place where he had
stopped. Then he saw a great golden carp panting and gasping on the
grass. In leaping after little flies, it had jumped too far, and was
lying on the bank, almost dead. Charming was sorry for it, and though
he might have carried it away for his dinner, he picked it up gently
and put it back into the stream. It sank to the bottom, drinking in the
cool, refreshing water, and then, swimming gayly up to the bank, it
said: “Charming, I thank you for the kindness you have shown me. But
for you I should have died. By this act you have saved my life; one day
I will repay you.”

With these words it plunged into the water again, leaving Charming
greatly surprised at its politeness.

Another day, as he was going on his way, he saw a raven in great
distress. The poor bird was being pursued by a great eagle. It would
soon have been caught and eaten up, had not Charming quickly taken his
bow and arrow and shot the eagle dead. The raven perched joyfully on a
tree.

“Charming,” said he, “it was very generous of you to come to the aid of
a poor raven. I shall not be ungrateful. Some day I will repay you.”

Charming thought this was very kind of the raven, and went on his way.

Before sunrise one morning, when it was so dark that he could hardly
see his way, he heard an owl crying out as though it were in distress.

“Hark!” he said; “that owl seems to be in great trouble. It must be
caught in a snare.”

So he began to hunt about, and soon found a great net spread by some
fowlers.

“What a pity it is that men do nothing but torment and persecute poor
creatures that never do them any harm!” he said; and taking out his
knife he cut the cords. The owl flitted away, but came back quickly and
said: “Charming, I need not tell you what a great service you have done
me. At daybreak the fowlers would have come and caught me. Without your
help I should have been killed. I am grateful, and one day I will repay
you.”

These were the three chief adventures that happened to Charming on his
journey. He made all possible speed to reach the palace of fair
Goldilocks. When he arrived there he dressed himself with the greatest
care in a suit of rich brocade, and put on a hat with scarlet and white
plumes. Over his shoulder he threw an embroidered scarf. He carried on
his arm a little basket in which was a pretty little dog that he had
bought on the way. He looked so handsome and gay when he presented
himself at the palace gate that the guards paid him great respect, and
sent in haste to announce to Princess Goldilocks that Charming,
ambassador of her neighbor the King, desired to see her.

“Charming,” repeated the Princess; “the name promises well. I am sure
that he is handsome, and that every one likes him.”

“Indeed, that is true,” said all her maids of honor at once; “we saw
him from the window of the garret where we were spinning flax, and we
could do nothing but look at him as long as he was in sight.”

“So that’s the way you spend your time, is it,” replied the
Princess,—“gazing out of the window at handsome strangers? Go quickly,
and get me my blue satin embroidered dress. Let one of you comb my
hair, and another make me fresh garlands of flowers. Get me my
high-heeled shoes and my fan, and tell them to sweep my hall and my
throne. I want him to find me in truth ‘Fair Goldilocks.’”

All the maidens rushed this way and that to make the Princess ready.
They were in such a hurry that they ran into and hindered one another.
However, at last the Princess passed into her gallery of mirrors to
make sure that everything was as it should be. Then she mounted her
throne of gold and ebony and ivory, and told her ladies to take their
guitars, and to play and sing softly.

Charming was led into the audience room, and stood so dazzled with
admiration that at first he could not speak. Presently he took courage,
and delivered his speech, eloquently pleading with the Princess to
spare him the unhappiness of returning without her.

“Sir Charming,” answered she, “all the reasons which you have given me
are very good, and I assure you I should take more pleasure in obliging
you than in obliging any one else; but you must know that a month ago,
as I was walking by the river with my ladies, I took off my glove, and
as I did so a ring slipped from my finger and rolled into the river.
This ring was more precious to me than my kingdom, and you may imagine
how distressed I was to lose it. I vowed then never to listen to any
proposal of marriage unless the ambassador first brought me back my
ring. So now you see what you have before you; for if you talked to me
for fifteen days and fifteen nights you could not make me change my
mind.”

Charming was very much surprised by this answer, but he bowed low to
the Princess and begged her to accept the embroidered scarf and the
little dog he had brought with him. But she said she did not wish any
presents, and bade him think of what she had just told him.

When he got back to his room he went to bed without eating any supper,
and his little dog, who was called Frolic, would not eat any either,
but came and lay down beside him. All night long Charming tossed back
and forth sighing.

“How am I to find a ring that fell into the river a month ago?” he
said. “It is useless to try. She has chosen to set me a task which she
knows will be impossible.” And he sighed again.

Frolic heard him and said: “My dear master, do not despair; you are
always lucky, you know, and, besides, you are too good not to be happy.
Let us go down to the river as soon as it is day.”

Charming only petted the dog a little and said nothing, but after a
while he fell asleep.

At dawn Frolic began to jump about, and awoke his master. They went
down to the river together, and wandered up and down. Charming was
thinking sadly of starting for home when he heard some one calling,
“Charming! Charming!”

He looked all about, and thought he must be dreaming, for he could not
see anybody. He walked on, and again the voice called, “Charming!
Charming!”

“Who is calling me?” he said.

Frolic, who was running along close to the water’s edge, cried out,
“All that I can see is a golden carp.”

And there, to be sure, was the great carp, and it spoke to Charming,
saying: “You saved my life in the meadow by the willow tree, and I
promised to repay you. See, dear Charming, here is Princess
Goldilocks’s ring.”

Charming stooped down and took the ring from the carp’s mouth, thanking
it over and over again. Then he and little Frolic went straight to the
palace. Some one told the Princess that he was asking to see her.

“Ah, poor boy!” she said; “he has come to say good-by. He has doubtless
decided that it is impossible to do what I asked.”

But in came Charming, and presented the ring to her, saying: “Princess,
I have done your bidding. Will it please you to accept the King, my
master, as your husband?”

When the Princess saw her ring brought back to her unhurt, she was so
astonished that she thought she must be dreaming.

“Surely, Sir Charming,” she said, “you must be the favorite of some
fairy, or you could never have found it.”

“Madam,” he replied, “I know no fairy, but I had a great desire to obey
your wishes.”

“Then, since you are so willing,” said she, “you must do me another
service; otherwise I will never marry. Not far from here there is a
Prince called Galifron, who is determined to marry me. When I refused
he uttered most terrible threats that he would lay waste my kingdom.
But how could I accept him? He is a giant, taller than a tower, and
thinks no more of eating a man than a monkey does of eating chestnuts.
He talks so loud that those who are near him become deaf. I told him I
did not wish to marry, but he has never ceased to persecute me and to
kill my subjects. So, before I listen to your proposal, you must kill
him and bring me his head.”

Charming was somewhat startled by this proposal, but he answered: “Very
well, Princess Goldilocks, I will fight this Galifron. I believe I
shall be beaten, but I will die a brave man.”

The Princess was frightened at this. She told Charming everything she
could think of to prevent him from undertaking the adventure, but it
was all in vain. He withdrew to arm himself properly, and then, taking
little Frolic with him, he mounted his horse and set out for Galifron’s
country. Every one he met told him what a terrible giant Galifron was,
and how nobody dared to go near him. The more he heard about him the
more frightened he became. Frolic tried to encourage him by saying:
“Dear master, while you are fighting the giant, I will go at him and
bite his legs. Then when he stoops down to drive me off, you can kill
him.”

Charming admired the little dog’s spirit, but knew his help would not
amount to much.

At last he drew near to the giant’s castle. All roads leading to it
were covered with bones of men the giant had killed. Before long he saw
Galifron coming through the wood. His head was higher than the tallest
trees, and he was striding along, singing in a terrible voice:


        “Bring out children for me to eat;
        They are the nicest kind of meat.
        The more you bring, the better ’twill be,
        For all in the world would not satisfy me.”


Then Charming began to sing to the same tune:


        “Come and look upon bold Charming;
        He does not think you very alarming.
        Although he is not as big as you,
        He’s come a giant to subdue.”


When Galifron heard these words he looked all around and soon caught
sight of Charming, standing sword in hand. He flew into a terrible
rage, and aimed a blow at Charming with his heavy iron club, which
would certainly have killed him if it had hit him; but at that moment a
raven perched on the giant’s head and pecked out both his eyes. The
giant struck out blindly in every direction, but Charming easily
avoided his blows, and wounded him so severely with his sword that he
fell to the ground. Then he cut off the giant’s head, while the raven,
who was perched on a tree near by, said: “You see I have not forgotten
the service you did me in killing the eagle. To-day I think I have
fulfilled my promise to repay you.”

“It is I who am the debtor to you for your timely help,” replied
Charming, “and I am very grateful to you.”

Then he mounted his horse and rode off with the head of Galifron.

When he came to the town every one ran after him, crying: “Here comes
brave Charming! He has killed the giant!”

The Princess heard the shouts, but she did not dare to ask what had
happened for fear she should be told that Charming had been killed. But
soon Charming came in with the giant’s head, the very sight of which
frightened her, although she knew that Galifron would never trouble her
again.

“Princess,” said Charming, “I have killed your enemy. I hope you will
no longer refuse the King my master.”

“I must,” said fair Goldilocks, “unless you can bring me some water
from the Grotto of Darkness. This is a very deep cavern, about six
leagues long. The entrance is guarded by two dragons with fire coming
out of their eyes and mouths. When you get inside the gate you go down
into an immense hole, full of toads and adders and snakes. At the
bottom of this hole is a little cave, in which rises the Fountain of
Beauty and Health. It is some of this water that I must have; it has
wonderful power for those who bathe in it. If you are beautiful, you
will always remain so; if you are ugly, you become fair. If you are
young, you never grow old, and if you are old, you become young. You
see, Charming, that I really could not leave my kingdom without
carrying some of this water with me.”

“Princess,” he said, “you are so beautiful that you can never have any
need of this water; but I am an unhappy ambassador whose death you
desire. I will go in search of what you wish, though I know I shall
never return.”

The Princess showed no sign of taking back her request, so Charming set
out with his little dog, Frolic, for the Grotto of Darkness. Every one
he met on the way said: “What a pity to see so handsome a youth
throwing away his life so recklessly! He is going to the grotto alone;
but if he had a hundred men with him he could never succeed. Why does
the Princess demand such impossible things?”

He seemed to pay no attention to them, and went right along, but he was
very sad at heart. At last he came to the top of a mountain from which
he had been told one could see the Grotto of Darkness, and he looked
about to find it. He saw a hideous rock, black as ink, out of which a
thick smoke was coming. In a moment one of the fiery dragons appeared.
Its body was yellow and green; it had great claws, and a long tail that
lay in a hundred coils. Fire was shooting out from its mouth and eyes.
When Frolic saw the dragon he was so frightened that he did not know
where to hide. Charming, who was resolved to die in the attempt if need
be, drew his sword, and took out the flask which Princess Goldilocks
had given him to fill with the water of beauty. As he started for the
cavern he said to Frolic: “I feel sure that I shall die in the attempt
to get this water. When I do not come back to you, go and tell the
Princess that I have died in the effort to fulfill her wishes. Then go
to the King my master and tell him of my adventures.”

As he was speaking he heard a voice calling, “Charming! Charming!”

“Who calls me?” he said.

Then he noticed an owl sitting in a hollow tree, who said to him: “You
saved my life when I was in the net, and I promised to repay you. Now I
can do it. Give me your flask. I know all the paths through the Grotto
of Darkness, and I will fetch the water of beauty for you.”

Charming was delighted to give him the flask, and the owl flew into the
cavern without any difficulty, and in less than a quarter of an hour
returned with the flask full to the brim. Charming thanked him with all
his heart, and joyfully set out for the town.

He went straight to the palace and presented the flask to Princess
Goldilocks, who had nothing more to say. She thanked Charming, and
ordered that preparations should be made for her departure, and they
soon set out together. The Princess found Charming so delightful a
companion that she sometimes said to him: “Why did we ever leave my
kingdom? I could have made you King, and we should have been happy
together.”

But Charming answered: “I could not have done anything so displeasing
to my master for all the kingdoms of the earth, though I think you
lovelier than the sun.”

At last they reached the King’s chief city, and he came out to meet
Princess Goldilocks, bringing magnificent presents. The marriage was
celebrated with great rejoicings. But Goldilocks was so fond of
Charming that she could not be happy unless he was near her, and his
praises were always on her lips.

“If it had not been for Charming,” she would say to the King, “I should
never have been here. You ought to be very grateful to him, for he did
most impossible things to win me. Besides, he got me water from the
Fountain of Beauty, so that I can never grow old, but shall be
beautiful always.”

Then Charming’s enemies, who envied him his good fortune, said to the
King: “You don’t seem to be jealous, but you have good reason to be.
The Queen seems to talk and think of no one but Charming, and how much
he did to gain her. As if anybody you had sent could not have done just
as much!”

“Now I come to think of it, I believe you are right,” said the King.
“Let him be chained hand and foot and thrown into the tower.”

So they took Charming, and as a reward for having served the King so
well he was shut up in the tower, where he saw no one but the jailer
who brought him black bread and water once a day. But little Frolic
stayed to comfort him, and brought him all the news.

When Goldilocks heard of Charming’s disgrace she threw herself at the
King’s feet and begged him to set Charming free; but the more she wept
and pleaded the more angry the King became, thinking that she loved
Charming. At last she saw that it was of no use to plead any more; but
she was very sad.

The King took it into his head that perhaps she did not think him
handsome enough. So he thought he would bathe his face with the water
from the Fountain of Beauty, which was in a flask on a shelf in the
Queen’s room. She had put it there so that she might look at it often.
Now it happened that one of the housemaids in chasing a spider had
knocked the flask off the shelf. It had broken and all the water had
been spilled. She swept up the pieces in great haste, and was at her
wits’ end what to do, when she remembered that she had seen in the
King’s room a flask just like this, filled with clear water. Without
saying a word to any one, she fetched that and placed it on the Queen’s
shelf.

Now the liquid in the King’s flask was what was used in the kingdom for
getting rid of unruly nobles. Instead of having their heads cut off,
these nobles had their faces bathed with this water, and they fell
asleep and never woke up. So one evening the King, thinking to make
himself handsome, took the flask and bathed his face in the water. Then
he fell asleep and never woke up again.

Little Frolic was the first to find out what had happened, and he ran
to tell Charming, who told him to go to Princess Goldilocks and beg her
not to forget the poor prisoner. All the court was in great confusion
because of the King’s death, but Frolic made his way through the crowd
and said to the Queen, “Madam, do not forget poor Charming.”

She remembered all he had done and suffered for her, and without saying
a word to any one she went straight to the tower, and with her own
hands took off Charming’s chains. Then, placing a crown upon his head
and the royal mantle on his shoulders, she said, “Come, dear Charming,
I make you King, and take you for my husband.”

Charming threw himself at her feet and thanked her.

Every one was delighted that he should be King. The wedding, which took
place at once, was the prettiest ever seen, and Prince Charming and
Princess Goldilocks lived happily ever after.