HUA MULAN

Among the works of sculpture, whether in jade, stone, or 
ivory, you might see a youth of great beauty attired in the full 
regalia of an ancient general. This is most probably the intrepid
Hua Mulan, a girl who joined the army as a man.

The earliest praises of Mulan are found in an anonymous 
epic of the Northern Dynasties (386-581 A.D.). Later folk
story-tellers and playwrights gave her a surname (Hua) and 
wove various details about her adventures to bring them to
life.

According to one version, Hua Hu who had served in the 
army with an outstanding record was now old and in poor 
health, although his name still remained on the list of the 
reserves. One day, he received an urgent mobilisation order
because of a highly critical situation at the northern boarder
brought on by repeated foreign incursions. His second
daughter Mulan who first took the message was set to thinking
... How could Father go at this age? This was out of the 
question. The only other male in the family was her brother 
who was too young for military service. The call, however, 
had to be answered by someone. She made up her mind to
enlist disguised as a young man, using her brother's name.

She prevailed upon her parents, who of course did not agree
at first.

On her way to the front, she met with a few other draftees,
all headed for the border garrison. But before being formally 
enlisted, they were drawn into the fight by battle cries. It 
turned out that the commander of the border troops was 
surrounded by the enemy. From the very beginning, Mulan
distinguished herself in extricating the marshal from his 
impasse.

From then on, she rendered one meritorious service after
another until, 12 years afterwards, she was promoted to be
a general without anyone suspecting her of being a woman.
In the meantime, the contending forces remained locked in
a stalemate.

One night, as Mulan was personally making a round of 
inspection, she heard fluttering of wild birds in the north.
It occurred to her at once that they must be startled 
by the approaching enemy. This she reported to the marshal.

Disposition of troops was quickly made and an ambush
laid for the enemy forces which had come out on a surprise
night attack. The invaders were taken by surprise in a decisive
engagement and wiped out, with the leader captured by
Mulan. The border war ended in a victory, achieved in no
small measure through the outstanding exploits of Mulan.

The Chinese forces returned in triumph. Imperial honours
were showered on Mulan. Instead of accepting the high
official post offered her, she begged leave to go home to aid
and comfort her parents in their old age.

Meanwhile, the marshal who entertained a grateful admiration
and a growing fondness for his young general offered 
his only daughter in marriage. Mulan had to find one excuse
after another to put off the matter.

Unconvinced, the marshal paid a personal visit to Mulan
at her cottage with an entourage of her former comrades-in-arms
to press the match. When they discovered her to be 
a pretty woman, their surprise was as immense as their
admiration.

Mulan, throughout the ages, has been held up by the
Chinese people as a symbol of patriotism, a paragon of filial
piety, and a woman of outstanding valor and heroism.