THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER


There was once a shoemaker who, through no fault of his own, had become
so poor that at last he had only leather enough for one pair of shoes.
So in the evening he cut out the shoes which he intended to begin upon
the next morning, and since he had a good conscience he lay down
quietly, said his prayers, and fell asleep.

In the morning he was preparing to sit down to work, when he looked,
and there stood the shoes all finished on his table. He was so
astonished that he did not know what to say. He took the shoes in his
hand to examine them inside and out; and they were so neatly made that
not a stitch was out of place, showing that they were done by a master
hand.

Very soon a customer came in, and because the shoes pleased him so much
he paid more than the ordinary price for them. With this money the
shoemaker was able to purchase leather for two pairs of shoes. He cut
them out in the evening, and next day was about to go to work with
fresh courage; but there was no need for him to work, for the two pairs
of shoes stood beautifully finished on his table. Presently customers
came in, who paid him so well that he was able to buy leather for four
pairs of shoes. The following morning he found the four pairs finished,
and so it went on; what he cut out in the evening was finished in the
morning, so that he was soon in comfortable circumstances again, and at
last was becoming really prosperous.

One evening, not long before Christmas, the shoemaker said to his wife,
“What do you think of staying up to-night to see who it is that lends
us this helping hand?”

The wife liked the idea; so they lighted a candle and hid themselves in
a corner of the room behind some clothes which were hanging there. At
midnight came two little naked men, who sat down at the shoemaker’s
table, took up the work which was cut out, and set to work so nimbly,
stitching, sewing, and hammering with their little fingers, that the
shoemaker could not take his eyes off them. They did not stop till
everything was finished and the shoes stood ready on the table; then
they ran quickly away.

The next day the wife said to her husband: “The little men have made us
rich, and we must show them how grateful we are. They must be almost
frozen, running about with nothing on. I’ll tell you what we’ll do; I
will make them little shirts, and coats, and vests, and trousers, and
knit them stockings, and you shall make each of them a little pair of
shoes.”

The shoemaker was pleased with this plan, and on Christmas Eve, when
everything was ready, they laid out the presents on the table instead
of the usual work, and hid themselves to see how the little men would
behave.

At midnight they came bounding in, and were about to set to work; but
there was no leather to be seen, only these charming little clothes. At
first they were astonished, and then perfectly delighted. With the
greatest speed they put on and smoothed down the pretty clothes,
singing,


            “Now we are boys so fine to see,
            Why should we longer cobblers be?”


Then they danced and skipped, and leaped over chairs and benches. At
last they danced out at the door. From this time on they came no more;
but the shoemaker prospered as long as he lived, and succeeded in all
his undertakings.