THE FIR TREE


Far away in the forest stood a pretty little fir tree. The warm sun
shone upon it, the fresh breezes blew about it, but the fir tree was
not happy. All about it were many tall companions, pines and firs, and
the little fir tree wanted to be tall like them. So it did not heed the
warm sunlight, or the soft air which fluttered its leaves, or even the
little peasant children who passed by, prattling merrily. Sometimes the
children would bring a basketful of raspberries or strawberries, and
seat themselves near the fir tree, saying of the tree, “What a pretty
little one this is!” which made it feel more unhappy than ever.

And yet, all this time, the tree grew a whole joint or ring taller
every year; for by the number of rings on the trunk of a fir tree we
can tell its age.

Still, as it grew, it complained, “Oh, if I were only as tall as the
other trees! then I should spread out my branches on every side, and my
crown would overlook the wide world. The birds would build their nests
in my branches, and when the wind blew, I should bow with stately
dignity like the others.”

So discontented was the tree that it took no pleasure in the sunshine,
or the birds, or in the rosy clouds that floated over it morning and
evening.

Sometimes in winter, when the snow lay white and sparkling on the
ground, a hare would come leaping along and jump right over the little
tree’s head; then how mortified it felt!

Two winters passed; and when the third came, the tree had grown so tall
that the hare was obliged to run round it.

“Ah, to grow and grow! to become tall and old! That is the only thing
in the world worth caring for,” the fir tree sighed.

In the autumn the woodcutters always came and cut down several of the
tallest trees, and the young fir, which had now grown to a very good
height, shuddered as the noble trees fell to the ground with a crash.
After the branches were lopped off, the trunks looked so slender and
bare that they could scarcely be recognized. Then the trees were
placed, one upon another, on wagons, and dragged by horses out of the
forest. “Where were they going? What was going to become of them?” The
young fir tree wondered a great deal about it.

So in the spring, when the swallows and the storks came, it asked them:
“Do you know where those trees were taken? Did you meet them?”

The swallows knew nothing of them, but the stork, after a little
reflection, nodded his head and said: “Yes, I think I know. As I flew
from Egypt I met several new ships, and they had fine masts that smelt
like fir. These must have been the trees, and I assure you they were
most stately and grand; they towered majestically.”

“Oh, how I wish I were tall enough to go on the sea!” said the fir
tree. “Tell me, what is this sea, and what does it look like?”

“It would take too much time to explain,—a great deal too much,” said
the stork, flying quickly away.

“Rejoice in thy youth,” said the sunbeam; “rejoice in the fresh growing
time, and in the young life that is within thee!”

And the wind kissed the tree, and the dew wept tears over it; but the
fir tree did not understand.

Christmas time drew near, and many young trees were cut down; some that
were even smaller and younger than the fir tree, which had no peace or
rest from its longing to leave the forest. These young trees, which
were chosen for their beauty, kept their branches, but were also laid
on wagons and drawn by horses out of the forest.

“Where are they going?” asked the fir tree. “They are not taller than I
am; indeed, one was not so tall. And why do they keep all their
branches? Where are they going?”

“We know! we know!” sang the sparrows. “We have looked in at the
windows of the houses in the town, and we know what is done with them.
Oh, you cannot think what honor and glory they receive! They are
dressed up in the most splendid manner. We have looked in and seen them
standing in the middle of a warm room, adorned with all sorts of
beautiful things,—gilded apples, sweetmeats, playthings, and hundreds
of candles.”

“And then,” asked the fir tree, trembling in all its branches, “and
then what happens?”

“We did not see any more,” said the sparrows; “but, indeed, it was
simply wonderful!”

“I wonder whether anything so brilliant will ever happen to me,”
thought the fir tree. “That would be even better than sailing over the
sea. Oh, when will Christmas be here! I am now as tall and well grown
as those which were taken away last year. O that I were now laid on the
wagon, or standing in the warm room with all that brightness and
splendor about me! Something better and more beautiful is sure to
follow, or the trees would not be so decked out. Yes, something better,
something still more splendid must follow—but what can it be? I am
weary with longing. I scarcely know myself what is the matter with me.”

“Rejoice in our love,” said the air and the sunlight; “rejoice in thine
own bright life in the fresh air.”

But the tree would not rejoice, though it grew taller every day; and,
winter and summer, its evergreen foliage might be seen in the forest,
and passers-by would say, “What a beautiful tree!”

A short time before the next Christmas the discontented fir tree was
the first to fall. As the ax cut sharply into its trunk, deep in
through the pith, the tree fell to the ground with a groan, conscious
only of pain and faintness, and forgetting all its dreams of happiness
in the sorrow of leaving its home in the forest. It knew that it would
never again see its dear old companions the trees, nor the little
bushes, nor the flowers that had grown by its side—perhaps not even the
birds.

Nor was the journey at all pleasant. The tree first recovered itself
while it was being unloaded, with several other trees, in the courtyard
of a house; and it heard a man say: “We want only one, and this is the
prettiest. This one is beautiful!”

Then came two servants in grand livery, and carried the fir tree into a
large and beautiful room. Pictures hung on the walls, and near the
large stove stood great china jars with lions on the lids. There were
rocking-chairs, silken sofas, large tables with picture books and toys
that had cost a hundred times a hundred dollars,—at least, so the
children said.

Then the fir tree was placed in a great tub full of sand, but no one
could see that it was a tub, for it was hung with green cloth, and it
stood on a very handsome carpet. Oh, how the tree trembled! What was
going to happen to it now? Some young ladies came, and the servants
helped them to adorn the tree.

On some branches they hung little bags cut out of colored paper, and
each bag was full of sweetmeats; from other branches there hung gilded
apples and walnuts, as if they had grown there; and above and all
around were hundreds of red, blue, and white candles, which were
fastened upon the branches. Dolls, exactly like real men and women,
were placed under the green leaves,—the fir tree had never seen any
before,—and at the very top was fastened a glittering star, made of
gold tinsel. Oh, it was very beautiful!

“This evening,” they all exclaimed, “this evening how bright it will
be!”

“O that evening were come,” thought the tree, “and the candles were
lighted! Then I shall know what else is going to happen. Will the trees
come from the forest to see me? Will the sparrows peep in at the
windows, I wonder? Shall I grow faster here, and keep on all these
ornaments during summer and winter?”

But guessing was of very little use. Its back ached with trying; and
this pain is as bad for a slender tree as headache is for us.

At last the candles were lighted, and then what a shining blaze of
splendor the tree presented! It trembled so with joy in all its
branches that one of the candles fell on a green twig and set fire to
it. “Help! help!” exclaimed the young ladies, and they quickly
extinguished the fire.

After this the tree did not dare even to tremble (though the fire
frightened it), it was so anxious not to hurt any of the beautiful
ornaments which so dazzled and bewildered it by their brilliance.

And now the folding doors were thrown open, and a troop of children
rushed in as if they intended to upset the tree. They were followed
more slowly by the older people. For a moment the little ones stood
silent with delight, and then they shouted for joy till the room rang;
and they danced merrily round the tree, and snatched off one present
after another.

“What are they doing?” thought the tree. “What will happen next?”

The candles burned down to the branches and were put out one by one.
Then the children were given permission to plunder the tree.

Oh, how they rushed upon it! Its branches creaked with the strain, and
if it had not been fastened by the gold star to the ceiling, it must
have been thrown down.

Then the children danced about with their pretty toys, and no one paid
any attention to the tree except the old nurse, who came and peeped
among the branches to see if an apple or a fig had been forgotten.

“A story! a story!” cried the children, and dragged a little stout man
toward the tree.

“Now we are in the greenwood,” said the man, as he sat down beneath it,
“and the tree will have the pleasure of hearing, too. But I am going to
tell only one story. What shall it be? Henny Penny? or Humpty Dumpty,
who fell downstairs, but soon got up again, and at last married a
princess?”

“Henny Penny!” cried some. “Humpty Dumpty!” cried others; and there was
a great uproar. But the fir tree kept silent and thought: “What am I
supposed to do now? Have I nothing to do with all this?” But it had
already been in the entertainment, and had played out its part.

Then the old man told the story of Humpty Dumpty,—how he fell
downstairs, but soon got up again, and married a princess. And the
children clapped their hands and cried, “Another! another!” for they
wanted to hear the story of Henny Penny too; but this time they got
only Humpty Dumpty. The fir tree stood quiet and thoughtful. The birds
in the forest had never told anything like that,—how Humpty Dumpty fell
downstairs, and yet married a princess.

“Ah, yes, that is the way it happens in the world, I suppose,” thought
the fir tree. And it believed the story because such a nice man had
told it.

“Well,” it thought, “who knows? Perhaps I shall fall downstairs, too,
and marry a princess”; and it looked forward eagerly to the next
evening, expecting to be again decked out with candles and toys, tinsel
and fruit. “To-morrow I will not tremble,” thought the tree; “I will
enjoy to the full all my splendor, and I shall hear the story of Humpty
Dumpty again, and perhaps Henny Penny too.” And the tree stood silent
and lost in thought all night.

In the morning the servants came in. “Now,” thought the tree, “all the
decking me out will begin again.” But they dragged it out of the room
and upstairs to the garret, and threw it on the floor in a dark corner
where no daylight shone, and there they left it. “What does this mean?”
thought the tree. “What am I to do here? What is there for me to hear
in a place like this?” and it leaned against the wall, and thought and
thought.

And it had time enough to think, for days and nights passed and no one
came near it; and when at last some one did come, it was only to put
some great boxes into a corner. So the tree was completely hidden from
sight; it seemed as if it had been quite forgotten.

“It is winter now out of doors,” thought the tree. “The ground is hard
and covered with snow, so that people cannot plant me yet. That is
doubtless why I am left here under cover till the spring comes. How
thoughtful and kind everybody is to me! Still, I wish it were not so
dark here, and so terribly lonely, with not even a little hare to look
at. How pleasant it was out in the forest while the snow lay on the
ground, when the hare would run by—yes, and jump over me, too; but I
did not like it at all then. Oh, it is terribly lonely here!”

“Squeak, squeak!” said a little mouse, stealing out of his hole and
creeping cautiously toward the tree; then came another, and they both
sniffed at the fir tree, and crept in and out between its branches.

“Oh, it is very cold!” said the little mouse. “If it were not, we
should be very comfortable here, shouldn’t we, old fir tree?”

“I am not old at all,” said the fir tree. “There are many who are much
older than I am.”

“Where do you come from?” asked the mice, who were full of curiosity;
“and what do you know? What is the most beautiful place on earth that
you know about? Do tell us all about it! Have you been in the
storeroom, where cheeses lie on the shelves, and hams hang from the
ceiling? One can run about on tallow candles there. Ah! that is the
place where one goes in thin and comes out fat.”

“I know nothing about that,” said the fir tree; “but I know of the
wood, where the sun shines and the birds sing.”

And then the tree told the little mice all about its youth. The mice
had never heard anything like that before, and they listened with all
their ears, and said: “How much you have seen! How happy you must have
been!”

“Happy!” exclaimed the fir tree; and then, as it thought over what it
had been telling them, it added, “Ah, yes, those were happy days.”

But when it went on and told them about Christmas Eve, and how it had
been adorned with sweetmeats and candles, the mice repeated once more,
“How happy, how very fortunate you have been, you old fir tree!”

“I am not old at all,” replied the tree. “I only came from the forest
this winter. I am now checked in my growth.”

“What splendid stories you do know!” said the little mice. And the next
night they came with four others, to have them hear what the tree had
to tell. The more it talked, the more it remembered, and then it
thought to itself: “Yes, those were happy days, but they may come
again. Humpty Dumpty fell downstairs, and yet he married the princess.
Perhaps I, too, may marry a princess.” And the tree thought of a pretty
little birch tree that grew in the forest; she was a princess, a real
princess, to the fir tree.

“Who is Humpty Dumpty?” asked the little mice. And then the tree told
the whole story; it could remember every single word. And the little
mice were so delighted with it that they were ready to jump with joy up
to the very top of the tree. The next night a great many more mice made
their appearance, and on Sunday two rats came; but they did not care
about the story at all, and that troubled the mice, for it made them
also think less of it.

“Is that the only story you know?” asked the rats.

“The only one,” answered the tree. “I heard it on the happiest evening
of my life; but I did not know I was so happy at the time.”

“We think it is a very poor story,” said the rats. “Don’t you know any
story about bacon or tallow candles in the storeroom?”

“No,” replied the tree.

“Then we are much obliged to you,” said the rats, and they went their
way.

The little mice also kept away after this, and the tree sighed and
said, “Really, it was very pleasant when the lively little mice sat
around me and listened, while I told them stories. Now that is all
past, too. However, I shall consider myself happy when some one comes
to take me out of this place.”

But would this ever happen? Yes; one morning people came to clear up
the garret; the boxes were moved aside and the tree was pulled out of
the corner and thrown roughly on the floor; then the servants dragged
it out to the stairs, where the daylight shone.

“Now life is beginning again,” thought the tree, rejoicing in the
sunshine and fresh air.

It was carried downstairs and out into the yard so quickly that it
forgot to look at itself, and gazed about it, for there was so much to
be seen.

The yard opened into a garden where everything was blooming. Fresh and
sweet roses hung over a little trellis; the linden trees were in
blossom; and swallows flew here and there, calling, “Twit, twit, twit,
my mate is coming”; but it was not the fir tree they meant.

“Now I shall live,” thought the tree joyfully, stretching out its
branches; but alas! they were all withered and yellow, and it was lying
in a corner among weeds and nettles.

The star of gold paper still stuck in the top of the tree and glittered
in the sunshine. In the yard two of the merry children who had danced
round the tree at Christmas were playing. One of them saw the gilded
star, and ran up and tore it off.

“See what is sticking to the ugly old fir tree,” he cried, and stamped
on the boughs till they crackled under his boots.

And the tree saw all the fresh, bright flowers in the garden, and
looked at itself, and wished it had been left lying in the dark corner
of the garret. It thought of its fresh youth in the forest, of the
merry Christmas Eve, and of the little mice that had listened so
happily to the tale of Humpty Dumpty.

“Past! past!” said the poor tree. “O had I only enjoyed myself while I
could! But now it is too late,—it is all past.”

Then a lad came and chopped the tree into small pieces, till a large
pile lay heaped on the ground. The pieces were placed in a fire, where
they blazed up brightly, and the tree sighed so deeply that each sigh
was like a pistol shot. Then the children who were at play came and sat
in front of the fire and looked at it, and cried, “Piff! puff! bang!”
But at each “bang,” which was a deep sigh, the tree was thinking of a
summer day in the forest, or of some winter night out there, when the
stars were shining brightly, or of Christmas Eve, or of Humpty Dumpty,
the only story it had ever heard or could tell,—till at last the tree
burned away.

The children played on in the garden, and the youngest wore on his
breast the golden star which the tree had worn on the happiest evening
of its life. Now that was past,—all was past; the tree’s life was past,
and this story, too, is past, for all stories must come to an end some
time or other.