THE WHITE CAT


Once upon a time there was a King who had three brave and handsome
sons. As they grew to be fine, tall young men, he began to be afraid
that they might want to rule over the kingdom before he was dead. The
King was old, but was as vigorous in mind as ever he had been, and did
not wish to give up his crown. He thought that the best way to live in
peace was to divert their minds by promises he could always avoid
fulfilling.

He called his sons to him and said: “You will agree with me, my dear
children, that I shall soon be getting too old to reign any longer. I
want, therefore, to give my crown to one of you. But it is only fair
that in return for such a gift you should do something to make life
pleasant for me after I have retired into the country. I should like to
have a pretty, clever, faithful little dog who would be good company
for me. So without any regard to your ages, I declare to you that the
one who brings me the most beautiful little dog shall be my heir.”

The Princes were surprised at their father’s sudden fancy for a little
dog, but were well pleased with the plan. They took leave of the King,
who gave them plenty of money and told them that in a year without fail
they must all return, and on the same day at the same hour bring him
their little dogs.

Before they started they went to a castle outside the town and held a
great feast, at which they promised always to be friends, and not be
jealous of one another in this matter. They agreed that the successful
one should share his good fortune with the others. Then they set out,
deciding that they would meet at the same castle on their return and go
together to the King. Each took a different road. All three met with
many adventures, but I am only going to tell you about those of the
youngest.

He was young, and gay, and handsome, and had all the accomplishments a
Prince should have; as for his courage, he was simply fearless.

No day passed without his buying some dogs. He bought big dogs and
little dogs, house dogs, hunting dogs, mastiffs, greyhounds, spaniels,
and lapdogs,—dogs of every kind. As soon as he bought a pretty one he
was sure to see another that was prettier, and then he had to sell the
others and get that one, for he found it impossible to take thirty or
forty thousand dogs about with him.

One evening he entered a great forest. Night came on suddenly and with
it a violent storm of thunder and lightning; the rain began to pour
down. He took the first path he came to, and after he had walked a long
time he saw a faint light and hoped he was coming to some house where
he might find shelter for the night. Guided by the light he reached the
gates of the most magnificent castle that could be imagined. The gate
was of gold, covered with rubies, and it was the bright, red light
which shone from them that the Prince had seen. The walls were of
transparent porcelain, painted in many colors with pictures out of
fairy tales, the adventures of the Sleeping Beauty in the Wood, and of
Cinderella, and a hundred others.

Upon the door was a deer’s foot fastened by a chain of diamonds. The
Prince pulled it and heard a silver bell ring. Instantly the door flew
open, but he could see nothing but a dozen hands in the air, each
holding a torch. He was so astonished that he hesitated to enter, but
he felt himself pushed forward from behind by other hands. He was
somewhat uneasy, but put his hand on his sword and walked on. He
entered a hall paved with lapis lazuli, where he heard two enchanting
voices singing these words,


        “Fear not these hands that float in space,
        Nor anything else that here you see,
        Unless from the charms of a beautiful face
        You would keep your heart still fancy free.”


This welcome reassured the Prince. The hands guided him toward a large
door of coral, which opened of itself and admitted him to a hall of
mother-of-pearl. Out of this opened other rooms so richly adorned with
paintings and precious stones and so brilliantly lighted with thousands
of hanging lamps that he was dazzled by their magnificence. When he had
passed through sixty rooms the hands that were guiding him stopped, and
a most comfortable armchair moved of itself toward the fireplace. At
the same moment the fire was lighted, and hands which he noticed were
very beautiful—small, white, plump, and well proportioned—took off his
wet clothes. Then they presented him with new garments made of the
finest materials and richly embroidered with gold and emeralds. They
combed his hair and waited on him with the greatest skill, though
sometimes they appeared so suddenly that they made him start.

When his toilet was complete—and I assure you the fine costume became
him well—the hands conducted him to a splendid room, upon the walls of
which were painted the histories of Puss in Boots and other famous
cats. The table was laid for two, with gold knife, fork, and spoon for
each; the sideboard was covered with vessels and glasses of crystal set
with precious stones. The Prince was wondering who the second cover was
for, when in came a company of cats, carrying guitars. They took their
places on a little platform, and, under the leadership of a cat who had
a book of music before her and beat time with a roll of paper, they
began to mew each in a different key, and to draw their claws across
the strings of their guitars, making the strangest music that was ever
heard. The Prince stopped his ears, but even then he could not keep
from laughing heartily at the positions and grimaces of these novel
musicians.

He was wondering what queer thing would happen to him next when he saw
a tiny figure enter the room. It was covered by a long black veil. Two
cats bearing black cloaks and carrying swords conducted it, and a
retinue of cats followed.

The Prince was more astonished than ever; he did not know what to
think. The little black figure approached him and threw back the veil.
Then he saw the most beautiful white cat that ever was or ever will be.
She looked very young and sad, and in a sweet voice that went straight
to the Prince’s heart she said to him, “King’s Son, you are welcome;
the Queen of cats is glad to see you.”

“Madam Cat,” said the Prince, “it is very kind of you to receive me
with such courtesy, but surely you are no ordinary cat. Your gift of
speech and your magnificent castle are strong proof to the contrary.”

“King’s Son,” replied the White Cat, “I beg of you to spare me these
compliments, for I am very simple in my speech. But now,” she added,
“let supper be served and let the musicians be silent, for the Prince
does not understand what they are saying.”

“Are they really saying anything, madam?” asked the Prince.

“Certainly,” she answered. “We have excellent music here. If you stay
with us a little while, you will soon learn to appreciate it.”

“Indeed, I shall be a ready scholar,” said the Prince, politely.

Supper was now served by the mysterious hands. Soup made of white mice
was brought to the White Cat. When a plate was put before the Prince he
did not like to taste it. But the White Cat assured him that his soup
was made of pigeons, and that none of the dishes intended for him
contained either rats or mice. They talked together on different
subjects, and the Prince found that she knew all about what was going
on in the world, and was well informed along many lines.

After supper the White Cat invited her guest into another room fitted
up with a stage, where the cats danced and acted for their amusement.
Then the White Cat said good night to him, and the hands conducted him
to an apartment just opposite the one he had been in before. It was
hung with butterflies’ wings of every color; there were mirrors that
reached from the floor to the ceiling; and his bed was draped in gauze,
fastened with a thousand knots of ribbon. The Prince went to bed in
silence, for he did not know how to begin a conversation with the hands
that waited on him.

In the morning he was awakened by noise and confusion outside, and the
hands came quickly and dressed him in hunting costume. He looked out
into the courtyard and saw more than five hundred cats making
preparation for this holiday, for the White Cat was going hunting. He
was led to a wooden horse, which he seemed to be expected to mount. He
did so, and to his surprise it galloped off gayly.

The White Cat was riding a monkey, which went very fast and carried her
even to the tops of trees when she wanted to reach eagles’ nests. The
cats ran after rabbits and hares and caught them, and the kittens
climbed everywhere for birds. The Prince had never enjoyed a hunt more.
When the hunt was over they returned to the castle, and the Prince and
the White Cat supped together as before.

So the days passed in all kinds of amusements, and the Prince thought
only of the little White Cat with whom he was so happy. But she knew
when he ought to return, and as he had quite forgotten, she reminded
him.

“Do you know,” she said, “that you have only three days in which to
look for the little dog your father wants, and that your brothers have
found beauties?”

The Prince came to himself and was astonished at his forgetfulness.

“Why, how came I to forget such an important errand?” he said. “What
shall I do? I can never get home in time, much less find a dog.” And he
began to be very much vexed and distressed.

But the White Cat comforted him, saying, “King’s Son, do not vex
yourself; I am your friend. You can stay here another day, for the good
wooden horse will take you to your country in less than twelve hours.”

“I thank you, beautiful White Cat,” said the Prince; “but it is not
enough that I return to my father; I must take him a little dog.”

“Look,” said the White Cat; “here is an acorn in which is a little dog
prettier even than the one in the dog star.”

“O Madam Cat,” said the Prince, “you are making fun of me.”

“Put the acorn to your ear,” said she.

He obeyed and heard a little sound inside, “Bow-wow!” The Prince was
delighted, for a dog that could be shut up in an acorn must be very
tiny. He was so eager to see it that he wanted to open the acorn, but
the White Cat told him it might be cold on the journey, and it would
therefore be better to wait until he was in his father’s presence. He
thanked her a thousand times, and said good-by very sadly when he
started out.

“The days with you have passed so quickly,” he said, “I only wish I
could take you along with me.”

But at this proposal the White Cat only sighed deeply.

The Prince was the first to arrive at the place where the three
brothers agreed to meet. They embraced each other affectionately and
began to tell their adventures. But the Prince did not tell his real
adventures, and showed only a common cur, letting his brothers think
that this was the one he was going to show the King. They laughed at
him and showed him two beautiful little dogs in baskets.

When they reached the palace every one crowded about to welcome them.
They went into the King’s hall. He did not know in whose favor to
decide, for the dogs of the two elder sons seemed equally beautiful.
They were already making their plans about sharing the crown when the
youngest drew out of his pocket the acorn which the White Cat had given
him. He opened it, and there was a wonderful little dog with silky
white hair and long ears lying on cotton wool. The Prince put it
through a ring without its touching the sides. Then he placed it on the
ground, and it got up at once and began to dance. The King did not know
what to say, for it was impossible to imagine anything more beautiful
than this little dog.

But he had not the least desire to part with his crown. The tiniest gem
of it was dearer to him than all the dogs in the world. He told his
children that as they had all succeeded so well the first time, he
would ask them to go once more. This time he would give them a year to
seek by land and sea a piece of linen so fine that it could be drawn
through the eye of the finest needle.

Each departed his own way. Our Prince mounted the wooden horse again
and rode back with all speed to the White Cat. He found all the doors
open and the windows, roofs, towers, and walls lighted brilliantly. The
hands came to meet him and led the wooden horse off to the stable,
while the Prince hastened to the room of the White Cat. She was asleep
in a little basket on a white satin cushion, but she started up when
the Prince came in and received him with the greatest joy.

“How could I hope that you would come back to me, King’s Son?”

The Prince caressed and petted her and told her of his journey. Then he
told her what the King wanted this time and asked her for help, for the
request seemed impossible to him. The White Cat looked serious and said
she must think the matter over; fortunately there were cats in the
castle who spun very well; if it could be done they could do it. She
would set them to it, and he need take no care.

The second year passed as quickly and happily as the first. Presently
the White Cat told him that the year was gone, and that he need not be
at all anxious about the linen, as she had a piece ready for him.

“This time I can give you an equipage suited to your rank,” she added;
and bade him look out into the courtyard. There stood a splendid open
carriage enameled in flame-colored gold. Twelve snow-white horses
harnessed in fours drew it; their trappings were of flame-colored
velvet embroidered with diamonds. A hundred coaches, each drawn by
eight horses and filled with richly dressed nobles, were ready to
accompany him. A thousand guards were in waiting behind to end the
procession.

“Go!” she said to the Prince; “and when you appear at your father’s
court in such state, he will surely not refuse you the crown you
deserve. Here is a walnut; do not crack it until you are before him.
Then you will find in it the piece of linen you asked of me.”

“Dear White Cat,” said the Prince, “how can I ever thank you? If you
will only consent to it, I will gladly give up all thought of ever
being King and stay here with you.”

“King’s Son,” she replied, “it is very good of you to care so much for
a little white cat who is good for nothing but to catch mice; but you
must go.”

So the Prince kissed her paw and set out. They did not stop at all
until they came to the King’s palace where the two elder brothers had
already arrived. They displayed their pieces of linen, which were
indeed so fine that they would go through the eye of a big needle; but
the King, who was very glad of some excuse, sent for a very small
needle that he had selected and had kept locked with the State
treasure. Through this the linen would not go. The Princes were angry,
and said that this was a trick that the King was playing on them.

But all at once there was a sound of trumpets and the youngest son
appeared. The King and his two elder sons were astonished at his
magnificence. After the young Prince had greeted them he took out the
walnut and cracked it, thinking to find in it the piece of linen, but
instead there was only a hazelnut. He cracked that and was surprised to
see a cherry stone. The people who were looking on began to smile, and
the King laughed to himself at the idea that a walnut should contain a
piece of linen. The Prince cracked the cherry stone, which contained a
kernel. He opened that and found a grain of wheat, and in that was a
millet seed. Then he began to wonder too, and murmured, “Why, White
Cat, you have made game of me.”

At that moment he felt a cat’s claw on his hand, which scratched him so
sharply that he bled. He hoped this was to encourage him, and opened
the millet seed. Then, to the astonishment of every one, he drew forth
a piece of linen four hundred ells long. Into it were woven all the
kinds of birds and beasts and fishes in the world; the sun, moon, and
stars; every sort of plant and tree that grows; and pictures of all the
Kings and Queens in the world, and all their children. When the needle
was brought the linen went through the eye six times with ease. The
King and the two elder brothers sat still and did not say a word, for
no one could help seeing that this linen was so beautiful and rare that
nothing in the world could be compared to it.

Presently the King turned to his sons and said with a deep sigh:
“Nothing consoles me more in my old age than to see your deference to
my wishes. I desire to put you to further proof. Go once more and
travel for a year, and at the end of that time he who brings back the
most beautiful girl shall marry her and be crowned King on his wedding
day. It is necessary that my successor should marry. I promise that I
will not then put off the reward.”

So they set out again, and our Prince returned in his splendid carriage
to his dear White Cat. This time she knew the day and hour of his
arrival, and had the road strewn with flowers and grand preparations
made to celebrate his return. Seated in a gallery from which she could
see him coming, the White Cat awaited him.

“Well, King’s Son,” she said, “you have again returned without a
crown.”

“Madam,” he replied, “your kindness has earned me one twice over, but I
am persuaded that my father is unwilling to part with it himself.”

“No matter,” she said; “you must not give up trying to deserve it. As
you must take back a lovely maiden next time, I will find you one that
will gain you the prize. Now let us take no more care about the
matter.”

Nothing passes more quickly than days spent without trouble or care. If
the White Cat had not taken pains to remember the time when he must
return to the court, the Prince would have surely forgotten it. But one
evening she told him that it depended on himself alone whether he would
take to the court one of the most beautiful Princesses in the world.

“To do this,” she said, “you must take your sword and cut off my head
and tail and throw them quickly into the fire.”

“I!” he exclaimed; “I cut off your head and tail! My dear White Cat, my
love, am I to do such a cruel deed? Ah! perhaps you are testing my
affections, but you need not doubt me.”

But she begged and begged, telling him that he must trust her and do as
she said. The tears came into his eyes at the thought of killing his
dear White Cat, and he begged her to spare him. But she was determined,
and at last with a trembling hand he drew his sword, cut off her head
and tail, and threw them in the fire. Immediately the most charming
change imaginable took place. The body of the White Cat grew tall and
became that of the most beautiful girl he had ever seen.

The Prince was so overwhelmed with astonishment and delight that he
could not speak. As he stood gazing at her, the door opened and a long
train of lords and ladies entered the room, each with a cat’s skin
thrown over the shoulder. They bowed low before the Queen and showed
their great joy at seeing her once more restored to her natural state.
She received them graciously, but after a few moments dismissed them,
saying that she wished to be alone with the Prince. To him she
explained that she was a Princess who had been turned into a cat by
some angry fairies. All her lords and ladies had been turned into cats,
too, and her servants had been made invisible, all but their hands. To
free them from this enchantment a handsome young Prince must come and
love her well enough to do her bidding.

Together they set out for the King’s court. Their chariot was more
magnificent than any the Prince had ever seen. Even the horses’ shoes
were of emerald with diamond nails. Since the Princess was as lovely as
she appeared, the Prince loved her more dearly than ever, and they had
a most delightful journey together.

When they came near the palace the Princess stepped into a chair made
of crystal, carried by her guards, and drew the silken curtains about
her so that she could not be seen. The Prince remained in the chariot
and soon met his brothers walking in the palace grounds with two very
beautiful Princesses. They asked him if he, too, had found a Princess.
He said that the most beautiful thing he had seen was a little white
cat, and her he had brought. They laughed at his simplicity.

“A cat!” they said. “Are you afraid that our palace will be eaten up by
mice?”

The elder brothers and their Princesses got into carriages of gold and
azure; the horses were decked with plumes, and nothing could have been
more brilliant than the cavalcade. Our young Prince followed, and then
came the crystal chair at which every one looked with admiration. The
courtiers hastened to tell the King that the three Princes had arrived.

“Do they bring beautiful women with them?” asked the King.

“It is impossible that they should be surpassed,” was the reply, which
did not seem to please the King.

The elder brothers entered first. The King received them kindly but
could not choose between them. He turned to the youngest and said,
“This time you come alone.”

“Your Majesty,” said the Prince, “will find in the crystal chair a
little white cat which mews so prettily and has such soft paws that I
am sure you will be charmed with her.”

The King smiled and went to draw back the curtains, but the Princess,
by touching a spring, shattered the crystal and stood forth like the
sun appearing from behind a cloud. Her fair hair floated over her
shoulders; her soft white robe was lined with pink. She bowed
gracefully before the King, who exclaimed, “This is the matchless woman
who deserves my crown!”

“Sire,” she said, “I am not come to deprive you of a crown you fill so
worthily. I have by inheritance six kingdoms; permit me to offer one to
you and give one to each of your sons. I ask no other return but your
friendship and your consent to my marriage with your youngest son. We
shall have quite enough with three kingdoms.”

The King and all the court were carried away with joy and astonishment.
The three weddings took place at once. Many months were spent in
festivities. Then each King and Queen went to rule their own kingdom,
and all lived happily ever after.