                       Loqman the Wise

There once lived in the region of Adana, in Cilicia, a young hunter
who, at the time our story begins, had reached the age of fifteen years.
One day, overtaken by a sudden downpour of rain, he took shelter in
a cave, and much to his surprise, he found that he had strayed into the
dwelling-place of the King of the Snakes, an aged creature with the
head of a man and the body of a vishap, or huge serpent.
   Affecting to pay no particular attention to the strangeness of this
situation, the young man lit a fire, and prepared to dry out his wet
clothes. While he was so engaged, the King of the Snakes reached out
his right hand and placed his seal on the young man's back. Over the
fire the young hunter prepared some khorovats or roast meat on a spit
from the game he had shot before the downpour, and taking a small
portion for himself, he offered the rest to the old King of the Snakes
and the four other snakes who waited in attendance upon their ruler.
   'You have given us food/ said the King. 'Now give us water.'
   The young man took his goatskin, went to the spring, filled it with
water, and returned. He hollowed out a hole in a rock and filled it with
water. The four younger snakes came and drank.
   'I am dying of thirst, my son,' said the King of the Snakes. 'What
shall I drink the water in?'
   The hunter fashioned a ladle out of a piece of wood and gave it to the
 King to drink out of.
   Rain continued to fall for three whole days and three whole nights,
and the young man was not able to leave the cave.
   'Can you not devise a way to bring the water from the spring into
the cave?' asked the King of the Snakes.
   The young hunter set to, and working for six days, dug a channel
from the spring to a basin he had prepared in the cave. Then he
slaughtered a deer, made a fire, and cooked the venison on spits.
   'Here is food for you,' he said to the King. 'Eat. I must go now, but
I shall come back.'
   'I hardly believe you will come back, my son,' said the old serpent.
'Leave me something as a pledge of your good faith.'
   The hunter left his rifle, and went off. Soon he was back again, looking
after the needs of the snakes and their King. When the time came for
him to leave again, the serpent took a small stone, and gave it to the
hunter.
                                                                         73
   'Take this stone,' he said. 'It is very precious. Do not show it to
anyone. Wrap it in a blue cloth. At night it glows like fire. And inasmuch
as you have given me food to eat and water to drink, I herewith adopt
you as my son. But beware of undressing in front of strangers, for no
one must see the seal I have placed upon your back.'
   The hunter went away, sold the precious stone in France, paid his
debts, built himself a large mansion, bought a flock of forty sheep, and
again returned to the cave. He kissed the old serpent's hand, slaughtered
the sheep, and richly entertained the snakes with roast mutton.
   The old serpent took out another precious stone and gave it to the
hunter.
   'Never say a word about me to anyone,' he said. 'I am Shah-Mar,
King of the Snakes.'
   The young man kissed his hand, and when he was on the point of
departing, the serpent lifted his finger, and four snakes appeared. They
accompanied him to his mansion, two in front, two behind. When he
arrived home, the hunter thanked them, and they licked his feet with
their forked tongues, and returned to the cave.
   Now in the meantime the ruler of Adana had fallen gravely ill.
Terrible ulcers appeared all over his body, eating him slowly away.
The best doctors were summoned to his bedside. A French doctor
ordered two chickens to be slaughtered and cut in little pieces and
placed upon his ulcers, and though this soothed them for the time it
takes to smoke a pipe, they were soon as bad as before. When they took
off the bandages, they found that the ulcers had consumed the pieces of
chicken entirely.
   The King was called Kayen, or Cain, and it was he who founded
Adana, and the country was called Kilikia, or Cilicia, after him.
   One of the doctors summoned to tend the King of Adana was a very
knowing one. He examined the ulcers, and then said to the King:
    'Sire, if I can get what I need, I shall have you up and about in no
time. Give me three days.'
    'I would give you a month, if it would do any good,' said the agonized
King.
    The doctor gazed into his crystal ball and learned of the seal of
 Shah-Mar on the back of the young hunter, whose name was Purto.
The doctor told the King that if Purto could not be persuaded to bring
Shah-Mar, the King would die.
    They fetched Purto.
    'Help me, save my life, my son,' said the King. 'Fetch me Shah-Mar!'
    'You ask the impossible, Sire!' said the hunter. 'The snakes would
sting me to death!'
    The chief doctor was furious, and he ordered Purto to be tied to a
 stake and flogged. Purto shouted and screamed, but the doctor was
relentless. He ordered the hunter's ears to be cut open and salt and
 74
 pepper rubbed in the open wounds. He had pieces nipped out of his
 flesh with pincers, and so tormented the young man that he finally
 undertook to fetch Shah-Mar.
    On his way to the cave, Purto shot ten deer. He brought them to the
cave, and did obeisance to Shah-Mar. The old serpent knew why the
 young man had come.
    'You are my adopted son,' he said, 'and I cannot let you be tortured
for my sake. It is too late to go now. Let us lie down and sleep, and
we shall leave tomorrow morning.'
    The next morning they set off, Purto in front, Shah-Mar behind.
The other snakes made to go with them, but their King stopped them
with a wave of his hand.
    'Go back, my children,' said the King. 'As long as you continue to
receive gifts from me while I am gone, you will know that I am well.
For the rest, do as you like.'
    The serpent and the hunter came to Mount Nauruz, which was
covered with beautiful, sweet-scented flowers. Shah-Mar plucked one
of the flowers and gave it to the hunter, commanding him to swallow
it without chewing it. Then he picked five bunches of odoriferous
flowers, and gave these too to Purto.
   'Bring these flowers three times to the boil, then drink the juice,' he
said. 'They will endow you with the ability to recognize the healing
qualities of every herb and flower.'
   Returning to his house with the serpent, Purto did as he was bid.
He drank the magic potion, and then, as Shah-Mar now commanded
him, he lay down to sleep. When he awoke, the serpent asked him:
   'Do you feel the healing power within you, my son?'
   'I now know,' replied the young man, 'that your head contains four
brains: the two right ones are poisonous, the two left ones are beneficial
and have healing qualities.'
   Then Shah-Mar asked his adopfed son to make him drunk on red
wine seven years old, tie his hands, cut off his head, and bury his body
in the ground. (You must know that it was the custom in that part of
the world, when a snake was killed, to bury it in the earth, it being
thought that if it remained on the surface, it would read the stars during
the night, and bring itself back to life.) Shah-Mar reminded him to
continue to send gifts to the other snakes, lest they learned of his death.
   'If the other snakes hear of my death,' he said, 'they will destroy the
earth!'
   Shah-Mar drank the seven-year-old wine, and lost consciousness.
Purto bound his hands together, cut off his head, and took out his four
brains. Of these he prepared two concoctions, one poisonous, one
healing, and then went to the King of Adana. The King commanded
the chief doctor to examine the medicaments. Purto handed him the
poisonous brew. No sooner did the wicked doctor put it to his lips, than
76
he gave a fearful scream which echoed through the palace like the
sound of a cannon, burst right open, and expired.
   The King was thunder-struck!
   'Is that how you were going to cure me? he cried.
   But Purto gave him the other medicine. The King drank it, and was
completely healed of his sores. The hunter was appointed chief royal
physician, and from that day forth they called him Loqman the Wise,
the Father of Medicine.1
   One of the snakes of Adana, however, chanced to find out about the
death of Shah-Mar, and he told the other snakes. All the snakes
assembled, and began to kill off the inhabitants of the country. When
the King came to hear of it, he summoned Loqman, and asked him
what to do.
   Loqman made forty packets of Shah-Mar's liver, took the dead
serpent's prayer-beads from his belt, and went to see the snakes. When
they saw Shah-Mar's prayer-beads in Loqman's possession, they
accepted him as their King, and made peace.
    'As long as you continue to receive presents of Shah-Mar's liver,
you will know that I, your new King, am alive and well,' he told them.
   (And all the days of his life Loqman sent gifts to the snakes, while
 even today, in that region of Cilicia, the people, who are convinced
that Shah-Mar's tomb still exists somewhere in the neighbourhood, put
 out gifts for the snakes every Sunday.)
   The fame of Loqman spread far and wide. With the remedies made
 of Shah-Mar's brains he could raise the dead, and for seven whole
 years nobody died.
    Now a certain woman was wont to go to Loqman's house every day
 to do the washing. One day, while she was bending over the tub, a
 handsome youth came up to her, put his hand in her pocket, took out
 a key, and went away. As the woman was leaving, Loqman's wife asked
 her who the handsome youth was.
    'He's my son,' replied the washerwoman. 'He is deaf and dumb. I
 beg you, persuade your husband to accept him as a pupil! The doctor's
 secrets will be safe with him!'
    Loqman's wife promised to try, and when her husband came home,
 she persuaded him to do as the washerwoman asked. The youth came
 and kissed the doctor's hand, and became his pupil.
    When a month had gone by, Loqman said to his wife:
     'Wife, I am convinced that that young man is neither deaf, nor
 dumb.'
   1 Loqman, or Luqman, the Wise is a legendary sage and physician celebrated
throughout the Middle East, where he is 'by some said to be a son of Job's
sister or aunt; by others, to have been a disciple of David; by others, a judge in
Israel; while others declare him to have been an emancipated Ethiopian slave,
and author of the fables current under his name' (F. Steingass, A Comprehensive
Persian-English Dictionary, W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd., 1892).
                                                                               77
   And for fear of his secrets becoming common knowledge, Loqman
tried to provoke the young man into leaving him with as many stratagems
as he could think of. But the washerwoman's son was never seen to be
anything but deaf and dumb, and survived all the doctor's attempts
to catch him out. At the same time he faithfully carried out all his
master's instructions. But Loqman was afraid, and tried to ensure that
the young man remained in ignorance of his secrets.
   The young man remained with Loqman for seven years.
   One day Loqman was visited by a man from a distant country who
suffered from intolerable pains in the head. Loqman shut himself and
his assistant up with him in the shed, and gave him a potion to drink.
The man lost consciousness. Loqman took his scalpel, lifted the top of
the man's skull, and saw a black crawling thing with eight legs moving
in the man's brain. Loqman took his pincers, but try as he might, he
could not get a hold on the creature. He tried other instruments, and
failed. In all his years as a physician he had never known such a case!
For a long time his assistant watched his master's efforts impassively.
Then he could stand it no longer. He forgot he was supposed to be
dumb.
   'Make the tongs red hot and then clamp them round the thing!' he
shouted.
   Loqman glanced at him grimly, but did as he said. The man was
cured. As soon as the bandages were in place, the assistant took to his
heels and vanished.
   He went home, took three large cauldrons, and filled one with milk,
another with wine. He crawled into the third, placing the cauldron with
the milk under him, and the cauldron with the wine over him. There
may he remain, while we return to Loqman the Wise.
   The doctor searched everywhere for his assistant, but in vain. He
cast spells, and learned that the young man was hiding somewhere
between Red and White, presumably between the Red Sea and the
White Sea. Loqman hired sailors to search the two seas and the land
between them high and low, but there was no trace of his assistant.
Finally he went to the young man's mother.
   'I am old now,' he said, 'more than one hundred and four years old.
I desire to talk to your son. Send him to me. I swear I mean him no
harm.'
   The washerwoman persuaded her son to come out of the cauldron,
and took him to Loqman.
   'You have caused me a great deal of worry, my son,' said the doctor.
'I am old now. After my death no one will know the secrets of healing,
and my name shall pass out of men's minds.'
   The young man kissed his master's hand, and they drank a cup of
wine together. Since his assistant did not yet know that he could bring
the dead to life and make old men young, Loqman told him:
 78
   Tut a large cauldron on the fire, and give me a potion to drink.
When the water boils, throw me into it, and put the lid on. After forty
hours, take me out of the cauldron, wrap me in cotton wool, and pour
the drops from this phial into my mouth.'
   The young man did as his master bade him, but when the time came
to pour the drops into his mouth, the archangel Gabriel suddenly
appeared and struck the assistant on his right hand, so that only one
single drop fell into Loqman's mouth. This gave him some life, and he
stirred slightly.
   Tour! pour! pour!' he murmured.
   But then he died.
   The assistant buried his master with Shah-Mar.
   From that day forth, the young man could not live in peace with
himself. Loqman's dying words rang constantly in his ears.
   Tour! pour! pour!' they said.
   He took to wandering through the world, but the voice of Loqman
the Wise followed him everywhere.
   One day he chanced to visit a house in which there dwelt a bishop,
a priest, two monks, and more than one hundred guests. He spent six
days there without seeing anyone laugh or smile.
   'Father,' the young man asked the priest. 'Why are you all so sad?
If it is on account of me and my troubles, I shall leave.'
   'My son, it is certainly not on your account. The lady of the house is
in childbirth, and the child will not be born. She screams day and night
in agony. We have called all the doctors, and none of them can help.'
   'Why did you not tell me before, father?' said the young man. 'I
can help her.'
   And he went to the woman's aid. Using his knowledge of his master's
skills, he cured the woman, and her child was born. The family's
gratitude knew no bounds. They made him the child's godfather, and
built him a splendid mansion. For the first time since the death of
Loqman the Wise he slept in peace. He had not slept for twenty-five
years, and now he slept for twenty-four hours on end, and the voice of
Loqman the Wise was finally still.
   He returned to his mother. She married him to a handsome girl,
and the wedding feast went on for seven days and seven nights.
   The minstrels recognized the bridegroom as the pupil of Loqman
the Wise. They began to ask each other riddles.
   'I have a riddle for you,' said the bridegroom.
   'You are the pupil of Loqman the Wise,' said the minstrels. 'We
cannot compete with you. We should lose our sazI'1
   (For it was the custom in contests between minstrels for the loser to
surrender his musical instrument to the winner.)
   1 The long-necked, small-bodied mandoline used by the Armenian ashughs
or minstrels to accompany their songs.
                                                                      79
  'I do not want your saz or your money,' replied the young man. And
he began to sing:
              ' What thing will water never wet?
                What thing on earth will never rust?
                What rolls and rumbles in the heavens?
                Who moans and groans beneath the dust?'
  None of the minstrels could solve the riddles. The bridegroom gave
the answers:
              'Water will run from the back of a duck.
               Gold will never turn to rust.
               Thunder rumbles in the heavens.
               And Logman moans beneath the dust.'

                      Recorded in Turkish Armenia c. 1900; see
                      Acknowledgements.




80
